





























































Hansard: May 03, 1991


 

 

May 3/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, very much.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure this morning to introduce to you, and through you to members of 
the Assembly, representatives of the Saskatchewan district of the Canadian 
Polish Congress who are sitting in the Speaker's gallery this morning. 
 
They are here this morning to recognize the 200th anniversary of the May 3, 
1791 constitution of Poland which brought democratic parliamentary 
government to that country.  As part of their celebrations, the period May 
2 to May 11 has been declared Polish Cultural Days in Saskatchewan. 
 
With us this morning in your gallery, Mr. Speaker -- and I would ask each 
of them to rise as I call their name -- is Stan Brzoza, the vice-president 
of the Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Polish Congress; Joe Szala of 
the Polish Combatants Association; Henry Lebioda, the director of the 
Canadian Polish Congress; and Richard Grabowski, who is also with the 
Polish Congress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 50,000 residents of our province are of Polish ancestry, and 
members of my family are proud to be included in that number.  I still 
vividly recall, Mr. Speaker, my youth and taking my Polish lessons from the 
late Monsignor Goski, who is a well-remembered stalwart of the Polish 
community. 
 
I would ask all the members to give a very, very warm welcome to the 
representatives of the Polish Congress and to extend best wishes for a very 
successful Polish Cultural Days in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing me.  I would 
like to, on behalf of myself and the opposition, join with the member from 
Regina South in extending our greetings to the group that's in the gallery 
that represents the Polish community and the Polish Congress.  We wish them 
well in their activities and I want to also say that the Polish people's 
contribution to this country has been a very major one in all fields. 
 
The Polish community in Regina is a very active community and we want to 
share in the gratitude of all Canadians for this major contribution that 
has been made to this country and made this country the mosaic that it is.  
The best in your deliberations and may the cultural activities be the kind 
that Polish people always expect them to be.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce to 
you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of the Assembly, Mr. Fernando Cousino, 
the Consul General of Chile stationed in Vancouver.  He's in your gallery 
today. 
 
The country of Chile has recently opened a consulate in Vancouver.  Mr. 
Cousino will be meeting with Her Honour Lieutenant Governor, with officials 
from Agriculture and Food, Energy and Mines, and he will be meeting with 
myself after question period today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just say in summary that Chile has a democratic elected government, 
has freed up its trade laws and has one of the fastest growing economies in 
South America.  We're very pleased to have their consulate here visiting us 
today and I'd ask all the members to welcome the Consul General of Chile, 
stationed in Vancouver. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of myself, Mr. 
Speaker, and the opposition caucus, I too would like to welcome the Chilean 
Consul General to this Assembly.  Some members of this caucus have had the 
opportunity in the last several years to visit your country. 
 
We want to certainly congratulate the people of Chile in their movement 
towards democracy to end the dark days of the military dictatorship which 
was imposed on that country in 1973.  And we want to say that we're looking 
forward to be able to strengthen both cultural and economic ties with the 
country of Chile as we march forward into the 21st century. 
 
Again on behalf of all members of the Assembly, bie pén venidos, camara de 
diputados, sen pïor y seno pïra, and ask all members to welcome the Consul 
General as well. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, it's not too often I get visitors.  We're on 
the far side of the province as you know.  And today I have in the gallery 
three members from the Lakeview colony in my constituency.  They're here to 
discuss agricultural problems as it relates to their colony.  And I would 
ask you to help me welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
I don't remember them being here before, and I hope that they'll make it a 
practice to come and watch what we do and hear what we do.  And I wouldn't 
mind meeting with you later and answering any questions I can for you.  
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's very much a 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you today and to this Assembly 39 
grade 4 and 5 students from Prince Charles School. They're seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

They have braved the four-hour trip from Prince Albert to come here to 
watch the Assembly as part of their studies about government.  They are 
accompanied today by their principal, Bob Markowsky; and teachers Connie 
Louge and Ray Griffin;, and their chaperons, Irene Leask, Liala Herzog, and 
Gloria Sabo. 
 
I'm looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to meeting with the students after 
question period for drinks and also for a photograph and to answer any 
questions they may have.  I'd ask that the members welcome the students 
from Prince Charles School in Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the House, Jo-Anne Polak, the general manager 
of the Ottawa Rough Riders, seated in your gallery.  She is with Lisa 
McIntosh of Big Sisters of Regina. 
 
Mrs. Polak has the distinction of being the first female general manager in 
Canadian professional sports.  And although I've been out of the game for a 
few years, you may very well be the first one in North American sports; I 
wouldn't be a bit surprised. 
 
She's a major player, Mr. Speaker, in what she has been . . . what has been 
considered a man's world.  But as father of four daughters, I have no doubt 
that she more than holds her own at the table.  As a matter of fact, she's 
proven that on many occasions in the last year or so. 
 
She's here to help raise the profile and raise some money for Big Sisters 
of Regina, Mr. Speaker.  She is to be the guest speaker at the girls' lunch 
out today at noon.  There are currently 75 young girls matched with Big 
Sisters in Regina and another 40 on the waiting list.  This organization 
needs volunteers, and I hope Jo-Anne's luncheon is successful in getting 
that message out. 
 
Earlier today, Mrs. Polak was presented with a Saskatchewan Roughrider 
sweater, and I'm a little surprised she didn't wear it in here today, Mr. 
Speaker, but she has her own Saskatchewan Roughrider sweater.  However, her 
Ottawa Rough Riders finished the season very well last year, and I suspect 
may be a strong force in the season this year. 
 
Wish you the best of luck.  Thank you very much for being with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce to you 
and to the Assembly today a group of 21 students, grade 8 students from the 
town of Wymark, Saskatchewan.  They are seated in your gallery, in the west 
gallery, I'm sorry.  And the principal there is Mr. J. Knelsen.  The 
chaperons today are Helen Schlamp and Sarah Reimer; Bill Heinrichs is the 
bus driver.  I want to welcome them.  I will be meeting you afterwards for 
pictures and discussion about what you hear in the Assembly today.  I want 
all members of the Assembly to please welcome my guests. 



 

 

 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce Mr. Peter Gilmer from 
the Saskatchewan Coalition Against Racism, who's sitting in the east 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it's very important for all Saskatchewan people to 
recognize that we have to respect each other, no matter what nationality 
and what background.  I think the work that the Saskatchewan Coalition 
Against Racism is doing to fight against the scores of disrespect is 
something that's very important in the development of this province, so I 
would like to recognize Mr. Peter Gilmer. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Effects of PST on Business 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as you 
know, in recent question periods the opposition has been endeavouring to 
get the Premier to explain the economic impact of the proposed provincial 7 
per cent PST (provincial sales tax) or the provincial GST (goods and 
services tax), its economic impact on business and consumer spending and 
taxes and so forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here before me today a resolution, notice of a 
resolution to be presented to the next annual meeting of the Saskatchewan 
Professional Photographers Association which, by the way, is a series of 
resolutions similar to restaurant people, booksellers, and the like. 
 
This resolution says in part, Mr. Speaker, quote: 
 

 The executive . . . (is) to appoint a committee to examine and report upon 
the feasibility of moving our annual Spring Seminar to either North Dakota 
or Montana, in light of the exorbitant costs of accommodation, food and 
other convention . . . (practices) in Saskatchewan since the imposition of 
the G.S.T. and the P.S.T. 

 
An Hon. Member: -- Nonsense. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now that's the quotation.  I heard a front-bencher say, 
nonsense.  My question therefore to the Premier is this: doesn't this 
resolution highlight the fundamental, basic contradiction of your 
government's tax and economic policies? 
 
On the one hand you claim you want to help the tourist trade.  On the other 
hand, as this resolution indicates, your 7 per cent PST is killing the 
tourist trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, if the opposition is really concerned and 
interested in the business community, I would be more than pleased to 
respond in some detail with respect to the harmonization and the benefits 
that it provides to the business community. 
 
And I would say to the Leader of the Opposition, if he takes the Regina 
Leader-Post headline, and what I'm about to give him in just a sentence or 
two, Mr. Speaker, it says: "Saskatchewan business gets input tax bonanza."  
And I will quote from the Federated Co-op, Mr. Speaker, because they say in 
here, and I quote: 
 

 Like Ipsco, Federated Co-operatives Ltd. (FCL) in Saskatoon . . . 
"obviously there will be some kind of benefit." 

 
 For Federated, the central wholesaling, manufacturing and administrative 

arm for more than 300 retail co-ops in Western Canada, that benefit would 
also be in millions of dollars (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Then they talk about $260 million benefit because all of the sales tax in 
the province of Saskatchewan will be rebated to business, Mr. Speaker.  
Everything that they are charged today or they're charged in Ontario or 
they're charged other places, in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
they get it all back -- $260 million that they will get rebated. 
 
And the NDP (New Democratic Party) leader stands in his place and says, 
would in fact it be good for business.  It's recommended by the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; it's recommended by the chamber of commerce; it's 
recommended by the chartered accountants' association, the consumers' 
association.  Anybody who has looked at the advantages of harmonization 
have said, you give me that sales tax benefit, write it off, give it back 
to me, Mr. Speaker, and I'll take harmonization every time over the way 
that they did it in Ontario under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, at long, long last the Premier has 
finally found the courage to defend his onerous tax.  At long last. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- It was unnoticed by the journalists in this legislature, 
but not the people of the province of Saskatchewan, that the Premier ducked 
under his chair for the last week and a half, and I'm glad he's now 
defending it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this.  Mr. 
Speaker, my question to the Premier is: he says that there are benefits, as 
he cites by that report, but he does not mention what the costs are, and 
our questions are related to the costs of this tax, as the ordinary people 
in Maidstone, in Minton, in Val Marie, in the Premier's own riding of 
Estevan claim that there are costs. 



 

 

 
My question, Mr. Speaker, of the Premier is this: you say that there are 
benefits; I want you to table your government's cost-benefit analysis which 
proves that this tax is not a hardship on the small-business people of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Table that study. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's interesting to note that the 
Minister of Finance has put together the benefits, Mr. Speaker, linked to 
reducing the sales tax to zero for businesses.  Now the hon. member says 
that he doesn't understand how that works.  Well, Mr. Speaker, he can get 
access to this book because I've had meetings with five, six hundred 
business people at a time and have gone through it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the NDP suggestion, which is in effect in Ontario, 
versus ours, which is harmonization . . . just let me give him an example.  
If you run a restaurant, Mr. Speaker, the benefits of harmonization means 
that you save $700 a year on industrial ovens; $1,400 a year on a fridge 
and a cooler; $700 on chairs and tables; $350 on plates and utensils; up to 
210 on utilities.  Mr. Speaker, you can save $1,300 per business in the 
province of Saskatchewan if there no sales tax on inputs -- $260 million a 
year -- which is documented by the Finance department, which has been 
copied by the Liberals in Quebec, which is harmonized by the Liberals in 
P.E.I., Mr. Speaker.  And the only reason, the only reason that the NDP did 
not harmonize Ontario, Mr. Speaker, is because they thought it would be an 
embarrassment to the NDP in Saskatchewan in an election year, Mr. Speaker.  
That's the only reason because business benefits from no sales tax at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- That's a fact and that's the truth, and it's 
well-documented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order!  Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if you 
listen carefully to what the Premier said by way of answer and the 
arguments which he gives and defends the provincial PST, these arguments, 
Mr. Speaker, are exactly the same arguments that the Brian Mulroney-Michael 
Wilson combination in Ottawa advanced in support of the federal GST.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, the results of those arguments as we know are the greatest 
recession that this country's had in a very long time, with businesses 
closing up and jobs being lost and going to the southern part of the United 
States and elsewhere. 
 
The same arguments -- and now the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 
advances the same arguments for the provincial PST.  I say to the Premier, 
table your studies which show the economic impact isn't destroying Main 



 

 

Street, Saskatchewan.  What's the cost-benefit analysis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, isn't it interesting.  The Leader of the 
Opposition has been standing in this House now for 10 minutes and he has 
yet to say, Mr. Speaker, as the Leader-Post quoted today, he has yet to 
say, Mr. Speaker, what his position is on the PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just make it very clear . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order!  Order.  Will the hon. members 
allow the Premier to speak? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I just say with great respect 
to the Leader of the Opposition, he's quoted today in the paper of saying, 
he hasn't made up his mind with respect to the PST.  He hid from reporters.  
Mr. Speaker, it says when he . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm sorry to interrupt you, sir.  
However there are unfortunately a good number of members interrupting you, 
and I believe you should be given the chance to respond.  Several members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- If the hon. member thinks that this is a very important 
issue, and I assume that he does, then I just ask him in front of all the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, indeed the entire country: come 
clean.  You can run but you can't hide. 
 
What is your position?  He's hid when he was asked what he was going to do 
with respect to the PST.  When Ontario brought down a deficit, Mr. Speaker, 
they couldn't be found.  They were hiding. 
 
And they hid a deficit in 1982, Mr. Speaker, and he's hiding today.  It's 
not honest.  He's not being deliberate.  He's not laying out to the people 
of Saskatchewan.  Even the reporters who he normally runs to find out 
what's going on, he can't be found, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Would he stand in his place today, stand in his place today and tell the 
people what his plan is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, after two weeks of . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. Order, order.  I'm going to ask hon. 
members to pay the same courtesy and allow the Leader of the Opposition to 
put his question.  Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have to smile because 
after two weeks of cowering under his desk and refusing to answer my 
questions, he's the last person to be telling people about running and 
hiding.  He's been hiding for the last two weeks. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Hiding for the last two weeks.  All of them.  Finally he's 
out there speaking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And after refusing to call an election for five years, he 
talks about running and hiding.  It's about time to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Oh, oh, oh, Mr. Speaker, this tough, tough fighter over 
there just scares the pants off us.  He just scares the pants of us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a question.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question to this very tough fighter.  Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Premier.  Now I know that he will not answer it, but my question . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  The member from 
Meadow Lake, could we have your attention, and the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, could we have your attention.  And I'd like to ask 
the Hon. Leader of the Opposition to put his question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have here a motion passed by the Village of 
Minton, Saskatchewan, on the GST.  And it says this: 
 

 . . . it is believed that Saskatchewan businesses located adjacent to a 
provincial or an international border are going to have a greater . . . 
(job in keeping competitive in the light of the provincial PST). 

 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is this: is this not another 
contradiction?  On the one hand you say you want to make Saskatchewan 
businesses more competitive, and that that's what this tax is going to do.  
On the other hand communities like Minton and Maidstone and Estevan and 
hundreds of others say it's making them less competitive. 
 
My question is: don't tell us about the tax credits, tell us about what the 
impact on the economy is going to be as a result of this tax, and table 
your studies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition says that he 
has scared the pants off us.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the emperor has no 



 

 

clothes.  When we look at that individual, there's no plan.  You can't see 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will say to the Leader of the 
Opposition, in his own release of October 3, Mr. Speaker, in his own 
release of October 3 he says, and I quote:  ". . . the fairest and most 
sensible way to proceed would be to harmonize the two sales taxes . . ." 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's his position then.  And then he flip-flopped, Mr. 
Speaker, then he goes on to say: ". . . a side-by-side tax is preferable to 
a tax on a tax . . ."  And that was on October 3, 1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now he stands up after, Mr. Speaker, after sitting here in the 
legislature for the last 15 minutes and  
 Dfor the last . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  How about the member for Regina North West 
not interrupting.  How about that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We raise in this legislature, 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that there's a $10 billion NDP deficit in Ontario 
that has an impact on all of us across the province, will raise interest 
rates.  And the Leader of the Opposition stands up and he says the Ontario 
budget has nothing to do with him.  They only happen to be NDP in Ontario. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would just ask the hon. member, if he stands up in 
October and says we should harmonize, then his individuals when they're . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm sorry to interrupt you, sir, but the 
hon. members here are continuously interrupting you.  I'm having difficulty 
hearing you and you have to be speaking louder and louder and I don't know 
if our guests hear anything.  So I'm going to ask once more for the 
co-operation of members to allow those on their feet to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I know the opposition doesn't want 
to hear the truth, and I thank you for calming them down. 
 
Just let me say, Mr. Speaker, that what we're trying to get out of the 
Leader of the Opposition, the NDP, is what is their position with respect 
to the harmonization. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition hid yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and the media 
couldn't find him.  He ran away from the reporters because he wouldn't tell 
them what he'd do. 
 
When they brought in the Ontario NDP budget, Mr. Speaker, they hid and they 
wouldn't comment on it.  They hid a deficit in 1982, Mr. Speaker.  And when 
I asked him today what's his position today . . . Mr. Speaker, you have to 



 

 

settle him down because they chirp from their seats because they don't have 
a position today.  And the people of Saskatchewan deserve more from an 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Effects of Free Trade on Agriculture 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well we finally got the gopher 
away from his hole and now he's running . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Now I don't like interrupting question period, but 
I'm just going to keep doing it this morning because each time a member 
gets to their feet they are constantly being interrupted, constantly.  And 
I think it's just wrong to be constantly interrupting the member on their 
feet. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, you ran around the country a while 
back selling the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement for Brian Mulroney.  As 
we now are seeing the disastrous results directly affecting Saskatchewan 
farmers.  Mr. Minister, the Prairie Pools are calling for the borders to be 
closed because of unfair U.S. trading practices. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is this:  will you work with the Prairie Pools 
and other farm groups to correct this unfair U.S. trading practice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the NDP ask 
about agriculture as if they're really concerned about it.  And I notice, 
Mr. Speaker, now that Allan Blakeney is an advisor to the new NDP 
administration in Ontario . . . when you look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
that came forward in Ontario, there was hardly a mention of agriculture -- 
hardly a mention of agriculture.  Whether it was because of the free trade 
concerns, whether it's because of the commodity wars and all the problems 
that people experience in agriculture in Ontario, the new NDP 
administration in Ontario didn't mention farming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not a penny more, no changes, Mr. Speaker.  Now the NDP stand up and say, 
well what are you going to do here? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we saw in Ontario was a 40 per cent increase in 
welfare payments.  It almost dwarfs the education budget, Mr. Speaker, and 
not a dime more for agriculture.  That speaks volumes about the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, and what they know about agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, it would appear the minister doesn't 
understand the question because he certainly did not respond to it.  I'll 



 

 

ask you, Mr. Minister, let me explain this to you.  The U.S. are violating 
section 701(4) of the trade agreement -- 701(4) being violated by the U.S.  
And what's happening?  Canadian prices are going down because they're going 
into our traditional markets. 
 
The drought and the subsidies, because of your trade deal, make the border 
harmonization equal and U.S. subsidized grain can come into Canada.  That's 
quite clear, Mr. Minister.  My question to you is this: will you now . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm sorry to interrupt you, but once more. And I'm 
going to keep doing this because I don't think it's fair.  Allow the member 
to put his question. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, in the light of this, will you now admit that 
your U.S.-Canada free trade deal, in that deal you got taken to the 
cleaners by the U.S.?  And what are you going to do to work with the farm 
groups to correct this action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- My goodness, Mr. Speaker, I couldn't have asked for a 
better question. And if you'd just allow me, Mr. Speaker, to give you some 
of the statistics, Mr. Speaker, I'll give them an answer that they can take 
home any place they like in the province. 
 
First let me just say this, Mr. Speaker, if you'll just bear with me.  And 
I quote and this is from the Swift Current Sun.  Garf Stevenson said it is 
doubtful that the situation will immediately affect farmers in the 
province, and I quote, he says: 
 

 "I don't believe it's much of a threat at the moment," said Mr. Stevenson, 
who explained that the prospect of U.S. farmers hauling grain in Canada is 
unlikely . . . 

 
That's the first thing.  Now secondly, Mr. Speaker, our exports into the 
United States in agriculture in the last year, 1989 to '90, was up 18 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, up 18 per cent.  That's live cattle, swine and pork, 
wheat, barley, oats, canola seed, and canola oil.  If you add those up, 
1989 to 1990, the exports are up 18 per cent from 189 million to 223 
million, Mr. Speaker.  And that member wants to close the border.  Can you 
believe it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, with great respect, I don't think he 
understands the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, if you're that 
short-sighted, well I think that's the result of the deal that you put 
forward.  You were short-sighted in the first place.  And now, Mr. 
Minister, you're standing four-square behind the Mexico trade deal. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, earlier this week Carla Hills said that if Canada wanted to 
be involved in the North American trading deal, they're going to have to 
reopen the U.S. deal and Canada is going to have to give up some more to 
the U.S.  That's what she said. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is this:  since our farmers and taxpayers have 
been hurt by this first deal, are you now going to stand in your place and 
continue to support the demise of agriculture and the taxpayers of this 
province to support your friends in Ottawa and United States? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it's the same thing we see with respect to 
the PST.  They have no position.  Let me just point out, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP are against trading with Americans because they're too big and they're 
too rich.  The NDP are against trading with Mexico or Chile because they're 
too small and they're too poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don't want to trade with anybody.  Now they don't even 
want to defend trading with Ontario because they know the NDP in Ontario is 
going to wreck the economy.  They'll be too poor in Ontario to trade with 
us, given your philosophy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that bunch over there, if they'd only take a 
position for five minutes and stay with it, Mr. Speaker, the whole world 
would be better off.  Certainly we would be here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Funding for Transition Houses 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order!  Order, order. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
the Women's Secretariat.  Mr. Minister, this week is a week designated for 
increased awareness of the problem facing abused women.  One of the 
problems facing women in this terrifying situation is that there's a lack 
of facility and support from your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did your government freeze funding for transition houses 
this year, effectively leaving them in a position of being grossly 
underfunded and unable to provide the extent of services that are necessary 
in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I would point out to the member 
opposite that we are certainly very concerned about the problem that the 
member raises.  We have increased the number of homes for battered women in 
the province.  We understand that there is a growing need in some of these 



 

 

areas today that we have to continue to look at, and we will work with the 
Department of Social Services.  We'll also work with the Department of the 
Family to address this problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also want to ensure that we are involved with the groups 
that are most affected and we want to address this problem. But this year, 
because of the economic situation, we realize that in some cases the moneys 
that are needed cannot be forthcoming, but we will maintain the quality 
that we have.  We have, as I said, increased the number of homes and we 
have to continue to address this very important problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, in 1989-90 there were some 727 women fleeing 
violent situations.  They were turned away from overcrowded transition 
homes, they and their children, and this year with an actual decline in the 
funding, the situation is going to get even worse. 
 
Your colleague, the Minister of Social Services, however, told a CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio interview that this underfunding 
was not necessarily a bad thing because it would give transition houses the 
incentive to become fund raisers.  Instead of being care givers for 
battered women, these overworked employees will have to start raising funds 
for transition houses. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why doesn't your government tell the Cargills and the 
Weyerhaeusers and the Pocklingtons to go out and privately fund raise 
instead of doling out charity to them and use some of that tax money to 
provide transition houses for women and children fleeing violent 
situations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I would judge from what the 
member opposite has just said that the NDP is opposed to diversification in 
this province.  And in fact, as I've indicated, we are not able to do more 
because of a shortage of funds in the province at the present time.  If we 
are not to have diversification, if we are not to have paper plants and 
fertilizer plants and some of the other industry in this province that is 
so badly needed, where in Heaven's name are we going to get the money to 
provide more services for the people that this member is so concerned 
about? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Okay, okay.  Order!  Monday, we'll have another question 
period.  Order, order, please.  Order.  Order, order. 
 
Excuse me, if you wouldn't mind, could I have leave to introduce some 
guests before you get on to that business. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: -- Thank you.  I would like to introduce to the House and to 
all members . . . And perhaps we can discuss the polls later.  And right 
now I'd like to take this opportunity to introduce some guests from my 
riding, and they're from the Kawacatoose Education Complex on the 
Kawacatoose Indian Reserve.  Many of you might be more familiar with the 
former name; it used to be called Poorman's, but it is now Kawacatoose.  
I'm sure many have been there. 
 
There are 15 students here, in grade 3 and 4.  They are accompanied by 
teacher Gerildine Worm and Sylvia Nagy -- the former Sylvia NcNab.  Many of 
you I'm sure knew Sylvia from years gone by when she was an employee in 
guide services. 
 
These students are here.  I trust they enjoyed question period.  I will be 
meeting with them soon.  Please welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Effects of Free Trade on Agriculture 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, 
before orders of the day, pursuant to rule 39, I would like leave of the 
House to introduce an emergency motion.  And it reads like this: 
 

 That this Assembly regrets that the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement is 
being violated by the United States and continues to threaten Saskatchewan 
agriculture.  And further that this Assembly urges that the Government of 
Canada not allow the importation of American wheat into Canada. 

 
I would move that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to begin this 
morning's questioning, the few moments that I have of questioning, to ask 
the minister if he will tell us why it was, if he knows, that the Ottawa 
government came through with what can only be described as a rather pitiful 
amount by way of the so-called third line of defence.  The Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool wanted $550 million for Saskatchewan farmers only as a kind of 



 

 

cash on the dash, no strings attached arrangement.  I think the minister 
will agree with me that things are pretty tough out there on the farm.  The 
unavailability of cash to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I recognize the Minister of Finance on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I know we've always . . . the practice 
in this committee is to allow a fair amount of latitude when it comes to 
dealing with interim supply.  And I, myself, I think in the three sessions 
now that we've been at interim supply have been prepared to ask questions 
that maybe don't particularly relate to interim supply, future year 
forecasts and past year lottery estimates.  But relative to an issue here 
and the federal government and how much they have put up as part of the 
third line of defence, Mr. Chairman, I don't think is part of this Bill, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1045) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Chairman, may I speak to the point of order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, we're considering 
the expenditure of Saskatchewan taxpayers' dollars for a two-month period 
in advance.  Part of the Saskatchewan taxpayers' dollars, as we very well 
know, are presumably going to be allocated, if everything goes through the 
way the government would want, to the funding of GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account).  Part of the 
third line of defence, which was announced two weeks ago at $170 million, 
was directly attached to GRIP and NISA. 
 
I wish to ask questions about the Saskatchewan involvement and 
relationships and the adequacy of that payment in the light of the fact 
that it's tied to the GRIP and NISA Bill and we're funding for it in part. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order, order!  I find that the point of order is 
well taken.  Order, order, order.  Order!  The member for Regina North East 
and the member for Moose Jaw North, I'd ask them to allow the Chair to make 
his ruling . . . and the member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
The purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the operation of 
government departments and programs on an interim basis while reserving to 
the Legislative Assembly the right to complete a detailed review of 
estimates at a later time.  For this reason, members must reserve their 
detailed questions on estimates and government financial policy for the 
regular review of the main estimates. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm going to accept your ruling, obviously, 
because I respect the Chair.  But may I say parenthetically, does that mean 
accordingly that it is impossible for the opposition to ask, for example, a 
question of the Minister of Finance that there's no payment to the farmers 
pursuant to the federal-provincial funding arrangements on GRIP and NISA 
until July at least, when farmers in the province of Saskatchewan need 



 

 

funding now for spring seeding?  Am I ruled out of that order, which is 
where I was heading before the Minister of Finance jumped in to try to cut 
me off? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What's your question? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well let me put the preface.  Let me put the preface.  
Don't hide.  Let me put the preface here. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order!.  The questions have been very detailed in 
taking three days on interim supply, which is very unusual.  Order!  And 
the detailed questions should be held . . . Order!  The member for Regina 
North East, order.  The detailed . . . order.  The member for Moose Jaw 
North, if he continues to interrupt, I will ask him to get up and apologize 
or else I'll have to take stronger moves. 
 
The detailed questions on estimates should be held over for the -- Order! 
-- for the main estimates, and the Chair has so ruled. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I will honour your ruling.  I'm somewhat 
stymied as to how to proceed in the light of this ruling to the next area 
because I always was of the assumption, sir, that interim supply was based 
on the fundamental principle of grievance before supply.  I'm trying to 
voice grievances which I've been hearing around the province of 
Saskatchewan, as late as last night from the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan in the Norquay area.  Four hundred people jam-packed a meeting 
there, and they asked me to ask some questions of this Minister of Finance 
about the provincial government's involvements in GRIP and NISA and 
implications. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And there's a place for it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No, the place is when . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Agriculture estimates. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No.  The member from Rosthern says there's a place and I 
say the place is right now.  When you want the money I want the right . . . 
where you're spending that money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I'm elected to ask those questions on behalf of the farmers 
in Norquay and my place is right now -- grievance before supply.  And the 
farmers have a grievance and I want to have some answers from this Minister 
of Finance right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And those people over there . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The member for Regina Elphinstone, if he'd 
allow the Leader of the Opposition to put his question. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- You won't let him put his questions. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Is the member for Regina Elphinstone challenging the 
Chair?   Allow the Leader of the Opposition to put his question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, my questions are headed to the area of the 
provincial government's request for funds which we are debating.  In the 
one specific area with respect to agriculture and in the one specific area 
although it's wider than this, but to be as specific as I can -- mindful of 
your ruling, sir -- the area of GRIP and NISA, provincial funding for GRIP 
and NISA, the provincial government's pushes over the last several months 
for third line of defence funding from Ottawa . . . and the net result 
being from Ottawa that the funding comes only if it is connected to GRIP 
and NISA, of which we are partly funding. 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance is: in the light of those factual 
circumstances, does the Minister of Finance anticipate that in the next 
little while the Ottawa government will be coming forth with badly needed 
cash in excess and in a different form than the $170 million which they've 
made to the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan to date? 
 
If so, what is the Minister of Finance's intelligence as to the amount of 
money coming from Ottawa?  When is it going to be coming because, for 
goodness sakes, everybody knows here the farmers need it not only today, 
they needed it a month ago.  What are the plans, what's his information, 
and how does it affect GRIP and NISA?  That's my question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, this Bill provides and asks the 
legislature to approve two-twelfths . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Is the member from Moose Jaw North challenging the 
Chair?  I'd ask him to get up and apologize.  Rise and apologize to the 
Chair. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- For what?  For what? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- He's challenging the Chair from his seat. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He was not.  He's not challenging the Chair.  That's 
ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- He's challenging the Chair from his seat.  Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, my point of order is this.  When a member on 
this side challenges you, sir, as the Chair, or any Chair, he or she will 
stand in his or her place and challenge you, sir.  It is not the custom of 
the legislature for the Chair to hear asides, of which I did not hear any 
and I sit on this side. 
 
And with the greatest of respect to you, sir, there has not been any 



 

 

challenge to you, and our members have not challenged.  And therefore there 
is nothing for the member to withdraw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Point of order is not well taken.  The member from Moose 
Jaw North is showing disrespect to the Chair, and he can be asked to rise 
and apologize for any comments made from his seat towards the Chair. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On a point of authority, I would 
ask you, sir, to enlighten myself and the members on this side on what 
authority, Beauchesne's and otherwise, or precedent that this has taken 
place.  I want to know that, sir. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster to keep some decorum. 
 
Order, order.  Rule 18, page 13 of Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan: 
 

 The Speaker shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions of 
order." 

 
Order.  It's rule 18, page 13 of Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan: 
 

 The Speaker shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions of 
order." 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman.  I very much appreciate this, 
but if I might, if I could just read the rule and to interpret it as you 
tell me to interpret it. 
 
The rule says: 
 

 The Speaker shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions of 
order. 

 
What happened here was, you said, if I may say so with the greatest of 
respect, that my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw, was challenging the 
Chair.  I'm saying, on what basis do you know that? 
 
Bringing order and decorum may be one thing; challenging the Chair is 
another thing.  You can call the member from Moose Jaw to order.  Fair 
enough.  I wish you'd do the same thing with your colleagues in the other 
side as well, as I know that you do.  But that's a different issue. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The member from Moose Jaw North was showing disrespect for 
the Chair and I brought him to order on those rules.  That's it.  It's 
finished, and the Chair has ruled.  Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I have a point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman: -- State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- My point of order, Mr. Chairman, is, I want to know what 
your ruling is.  I have not understood and, to be frank with you, fully 
heard your ruling.  I want to know what your ruling is. 
 
And may I just phrase it to ask, not in a confrontational way: is your 
ruling that you are restoring order within the Chamber, in which case quite 
fully I support you in that regard and I know that we've all been 
cantankerous and we've made your job difficult.  If that's the ruling, we 
fully accept and will fully try to comply.  I have no quarrels with that. 
 
If, on the other hand, your ruling is that the member from Moose Jaw North 
has challenged the Chair and must therefore withdraw, that is the point 
that we are contesting.  And if you are dropping that latter contention, 
then there is no problem.  And I'm asking simply, sir, which is it of those 
two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If I could just respond to 
the point of order.  I think it was very clear to everyone in this Assembly 
why you brought the member from Moose Jaw North to order and interpreted 
his statement as being challenging the Chair. 
 
And his statement was quite unequivocally, have you been in the caucus 
today, implying, from my interpretation, that you were being prejudiced in 
your ruling as a party member. And therefore that can be interpreted in no 
other way as you being prejudiced in your ruling and therefore he was 
challenging your authority and your motivation in making the rule. 
 
And I would suggest to you that that is an extremely, very extremely 
important accusation for a member of this House to bring into question the 
integrity of the presiding officer.  And I suggest to you, sir, that you 
are absolutely correct in calling him not only to order but asking him, are 
you, sir, challenging the Chair, which in my humble estimation is exactly 
what he was doing. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The concern of the Chair is that there is order in the 
legislature and I think we've dealt with this now.  The question before the 
committee is interim supply number one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and again I appreciate 
your very difficult job, sir.  And I know sometimes it may seem to you that 
we do not co-operate with you, but I intend to tell you that our side does 
want to co-operate with you and the Clerk and the staff.  We have our 
views.  It's a pre-election period.  I'm sure you understand the 
circumstances under which these are raised, and I fully understand their 
interventions.  So thank you very much for clarifying that for us. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, if I might, I want to pursue just for a moment or two 
the question of the third line of defence and what the Minister of Finance, 
his views are.  I'd like to ask the Minister of Finance whether or not he 



 

 

was personally involved in the negotiations leading up to the announcement 
a few weeks ago of the third line of defence.  Was he representing the 
Government of Saskatchewan in those negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The Bill that these motions are predicated on ask the 
committee on an interim basis to advance two-twelfths for the NISA 
appropriation as well as the GRIP appropriation, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, you see, if I may say so, the Minister 
of Finance is attempting by straight technical statement, I say with the 
greatest respect, avoid the larger policy answers which farmers are asking.  
And frankly he may be technically right, and I guess I've got to phrase the 
question more directly that way.  But I tell you it betrays the fact that 
this government has no confidence on the larger policy issues and what he 
knows the farmers are concerned about out there. 
 
So does this mean, in this narrow two months that you're trying to restrict 
me to, that there's no payment to the farmers of Saskatchewan with respect 
to this announcement unless they join up on NISA and GRIP.  Is that what it 
amounts to?  There's no money coming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, not that I'm aware of. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, was the minister's answer that I don't know?  
I didn't hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, not that I'm aware of. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, we are in the next two months period 
appropriation and would the minister agree with me that the farmers are in 
an immediate cash flow crisis.  The minister just said that there is no 
money with respect to the GRIP and NISA related third line of defence 
so-called, which is really a second line of defence.  And clearly to state 
the obvious, but I'll ask the question, is there any money allocated 
provincially for the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan in this spring 
seeding period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the appropriation that these motions speak to on 
an interim basis, Mr. Chairman, will provide two-twelfths for the 
province's contribution towards GRIP and NISA, and that's what we're asking 
the committee to approve on an interim basis. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I take it from that the answer is so there's 
no source of money, so-called cash on the dash that's coming from that 
point of view and that we're talking only about funding for GRIP and NISA 
for the two-months period as has been negotiated by GRIP and NISA. 
 
Will the minister advise in this next two-month period, is he or the 
Minister of Agriculture or the Associate Minister of Agriculture involved 
in any ongoing negotiations with respect to the federal government to 
improve GRIP and NISA for this next two-month period, to take into account 



 

 

some of the concerns of the farming community. 
 
Are these discussions taking place?  Who's involved in them?  Are you 
involved in them, sir?  Are officials?  If so, what officials, what's the 
timetable, and what are the issues which are being put on the table with 
respect to the perceived and real inadequacies of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, there may 
well be discussions, but I can't speak for other ministers or associate 
ministers.  And I would recommend that the hon. member put those questions, 
those detailed kinds of questions to the appropriate ministers in the more 
detailed examination under their estimates. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to GRIP and NISA and the funding 
that we're seeking for the next two months, will the minister confirm that 
the net cost, roughly speaking, in per capita terms, to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan -- the Bill that we're talking about here -- as to our portion 
on GRIP and NISA is $164 per capita.  I don't know how the two-twelfths of 
that breaks down, plus . . . well not plus -- as contrasted with Ontario 
where the per capita cost there is approximately $30 and the per capita 
cost for GRIP and NISA in Quebec is at $18.  Would the minister confirm 
those numbers?  Am I wrong in those calculations of taxpayers' costs on 
those programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The appropriations in total for payments to the . . . 
pursuant to the gross revenue insurance plan and payments pursuant to the 
net income stabilization account total 106.8 million plus $18 million.  We 
want the committee to, on an interim basis, advance two-twelfths of that 
amount.  To determine the per capita number then, I would just recommend to 
the hon. member that you would divide that number by the population of 
Saskatchewan.  You would end up with the per capita contribution on behalf 
of the taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, on a rough calculation I think it amounts -- 
I don't have my computer here -- but about $164 per capita.  The minister 
shakes his head.  I invite him to correct me; I am seeking answers here.  I 
mean, so provide me the answers. 
 
And it's not so much the Saskatchewan per capita cost that I'm concerned 
about.  I am concerned about the per capita costs in Saskatchewan, but I'm 
also wanting to compare what the per capita cost in Saskatchewan is to the 
per capita cost for the same program in Ontario and in  
 DQuebec.  And the Minister of Finance is the only person who has those 
numbers.  I want to know what kind of a deal has been negotiated here by 
this Minister of Finance and this Minister of Agriculture based on those 
kinds of per capita costs.  So before I can make any conclusion or make any 
argument on that, I have to know the figures. 
 
Thus my question to you sir: is it correct that it is 164 roughly per 
capita for every man, woman, and child in the province of Saskatchewan, 30 
in Ontario, and 18 in the province of Quebec.  Are those the numbers?  And 
if not, then as I say, I want to find out what are the numbers. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, if we work on the assumption that 
there's a million people plus in the province, and the numbers I referred 
to total roughly $124 million, then the per capita contribution would be 
about $124, and for this appropriation on behalf of the taxpayers who are 
asking the committee to advance $20.67 per capita, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, the other side of my question . . . I'm 
trying to assess the two-twelfths of that 124 that we are -- as the 
minister says -- we are obligated for.  I'd like to sort of know what that 
looks like in comparison to the per capita for the same program in Ontario 
and in Quebec.  The minister and his officials must surely have that 
figure.  Can they tell me, if it's 124 per capita in Saskatchewan, what is 
it in Ontario and Quebec? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, relative to 
what the numbers are in Ontario and Quebec, (a) I would recommend either he 
ask the Minister of Agriculture in detailed examination of the estimates, 
or put the inquiry directly to Ontario or Quebec. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Is it the position, Mr. Chairman, that the minister refuses 
to give me the per capita costs; or incredibly, I would argue, he does not 
know the per capita costs?  I will ask that first question. 
 
I will ask the second related question.  Was this deal of GRIP and NISA and 
the impact on taxpayers negotiated in the absence of your input as Minister 
of Finance or the input of your Finance officials?  Because we're talking 
about a budget here, two-twelfths of a budget, with budgetary implications 
and considerations.  Were you not a part of those national negotiations and 
their possible impact here at home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, as I 
understand it, the cost of the program varies from province to province. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, you know, I understand the frustration 
of the government in the way that we perhaps phrase our questions, and I 
readily admit that perhaps we don't come quite succinctly to the point.  
But I have to say, admitting some concern on our side, that the answer here 
is not very helpful either. 
 
It's not credible nor helpful in terms of speed for the minister to simply 
say, well, you know, I don't know what Ontario and Quebec does; you go 
figure it out, take your calculator, etc.  Because he knows what I'm trying 
to get at.  And he either has a good defence or he doesn't have a good 
defence, and that's what we're trying to get at. 
 
And so I'll try one more time, Mr. Chairman.  I don't have very many more 
questions in this field, and my other colleagues have other questions to 
move on in this Bill.  But I want to ask you, sir, you know what those per 
capita costs are for Quebec and for Ontario, as examples.  And I would 
invite you, sir, to give me them because I want to compare them to the 
Saskatchewan figure and I want to see what kind of a tax bite the taxpayers 
in Ontario and Quebec have with respect to GRIP and NISA, and I want to 
compare that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The member for Rosthern, allow the Leader of the 
Opposition to put his question.  Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So would the minister please give 
me the per capita costs in Ontario and Quebec as compared to Saskatchewan 
for the programs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd have to recommend to the committee 
that the hon. member put that kind of detailed question to the Agriculture 
officials when they are here and in place for full examination of their 
estimates by the committee.  As I said before the cost varies from province 
to province.  The cost per benefit does not. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Let me try one more time here.  Are you telling me that you 
know the per capita but you're not going to tell me, or are you saying you 
do not know the per capita comparisons.  Which of those two is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, at the 
risk of sending the opposition into a tail-spin again, that kind of 
detailed question about what the per capita cost for GRIP and NISA are in 
Quebec and Ontario is hardly relevant to the examination of this motion in 
the Appropriation Bill. 
 
Having said that, as I said earlier, I don't have that kind of detail.  
That's why I recommended to you if anybody might have it, it could be the 
Agriculture officials, and that might be an appropriate question to bring 
up when their estimates are under examination. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, at the risk of putting the Minister of 
Finance and the government in a tail-spin . . . although there is very 
little risk of a tail-spin over there.  They've gone down so far there's 
nowhere left to go to tail down.  But, leaving that as an aside . . . 
 
What's the minister showing me from Rosthern? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- NDP attack falters. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Oh falters, oh I see. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- On the wrong side again. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Oh good. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- NDP silent on PST . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much.  That is what I call a brilliant 
intervention by a brilliant minister, a brilliant minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance says -- and it looks 
like we're going to be forced to do this, that he will not give us the 
numbers or that he does not have those numbers -- but he says moreover, in 
effect by implication, that it is not our duty or our responsibility or our 
right to ask about those numbers. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He didn't say that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Oh yes because he said we're talking about the interim 
supply here.  And well what are they? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I got the wrong Bill? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No you've got the right Bill, but you've got absolutely the 
wrong arguments, not only on this issue but on virtually everything else 
that you've answered with respect to this committee. 
 
We are here as legislators trying to judge whether or not the two-twelfths 
expenditures of all of the items are measured in the public interest.  We 
are here trying to figure out whether or not -- by virtue of a certain 
allocation of sums, with respect to GRIP and NISA, the area that I'm 
talking about -- the Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying a disproportionately 
larger amount of their share for those programs as compared to other 
provinces.  And if that's so, what is it in terms of the negotiation which 
resulted -- if that's so, you refuse to confirm or deny it -- what is it in 
the negotiation process which made the Saskatchewan taxpayers pay a lot 
more for GRIP and NISA here in Saskatchewan than say the wealthier 
provinces of Ontario and Quebec, at a time when the province of 
Saskatchewan is running a deficit, at a time when you're putting on the 7 
per cent PST, at a time when our economy is hurting very badly? 
 
And we're trying to figure out whether or not this is an appropriate two 
months expenditure, what's the justification for it.  And you, sir, are 
absolutely incapable and unwilling -- if there is a willingness there 
because of an argument -- to try to give us an answer to that proposition. 
 
Now surely to goodness that is not beyond the capacity of you or your 
officials to be able to do -- to mount an argument which says: well here's 
the rationale for the differences, here's the purpose politically, here's 
the social policy, here's the impact economically on the other programs. 
 
The two-twelfth months that you're studying has an impact on education or 
health or whatever it happens to be because we had to do it in this context 
and we had to make the choices.  That's what I'm trying to get into, to get 
the minister to explain.  And for goodness sakes, Mr. Minister, it doesn't 
require 20 minutes of wrestling or wrangling.  There is either an economic 
policy which is reasoned and a social good behind this policy or there 
isn't. 
 
(1115) 
 
So I guess I have to retreat from this because the minister is again, like 
the government and the Premier, hiding -- not wanting to engage in the 



 

 

debate on this issue.  Obviously its economic and fiscal plan is none.  And 
I'm sorry to hear this response, but I guess in the interests of moving the 
committee on, I have to take the stonewalling of the Minister of Finance 
and assume that he is not able to defend.  Because what farmers are telling 
me is probably true, that the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan are 
paying a disproportionately high amount of money and as a consequence the 
farmers are paying higher premiums, and as a consequence other programs are 
also affected by this two-twelfths.  And the minister's silence on this 
issue is deafening.  It is deafening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I want to 
go back to our discussion on the provincial goods and services tax, and 
specifically ask the Minister a question that he failed to answer in 
question period yesterday, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you about your budget remarks of last year when 
you introduced your 1990-91 budget.  And you said, sir, with respect to tax 
levels in this province, and I quote: 
 

 Loudly and clearly, taxpayers through Saskatchewan are saying that tax 
increases are not acceptable. 

 
 Quite simply, the people have said they have no more to give . . . 
 

And I quote you, sir, you said: 
 

 The Goods and Services Tax is unacceptable. 
 
 . . . enough is enough. 
 

I wonder, in light of those remarks, if you could explain why last year, in 
April, you believed the goods and services tax was unacceptable, and this 
year you're introducing a provincial GST. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I explained yesterday to the members of the 
committee, Mr. Chairman, yes, if one goes across the province in pre-budget 
consultations as I did, if one surveys the public as some members of the 
opposition might have, you don't hear people -- not very many at least; you 
will hear some -- volunteering that they want to pay more taxes. 
 
But what you clearly hear is people saying that we must control the debt 
and deficit.  We must do something to shore up and stabilize our rural 
economy, and in so doing, our entire provincial economy.  And that's what 
this budget aims to do. 
 
It aims to do that in a number of ways, but specifically the $125 million 
in revenue that we gain this year by going, on the one hand, side by side, 
which means a revenue drop, but on the other hand, by broadening the base 
which means a revenue increase, is earmarked to trigger the $1.3 billion 
roughly payment from the safety nets which will help stabilize the entire 
economy. 



 

 

 
As well by taking that approach, Mr. Chairman, we will not let the deficit 
rise by $125 million which is what the people were clearly saying they did 
not want to see happen.  They wanted to see it go the other way. 
 
And so we've met both objectives.  We've stabilized the rural economy and 
we've controlled the debt and deficit with that move, not to mention, which 
we talked about many times in this House, about how it will simplify things 
for business, but more importantly make businesses more competitive, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister another question.  
Mr. Minister, you say that somehow the provincial GST is controlling your 
deficit, yet you're adding to the deficit, Mr. Minister, by in excess of 
$300 million again this year.  You haven't introduced the program for 
deficit reduction.  What utter nonsense, Mr. Minister, just utter nonsense.  
And, Mr. Minister, what a lot of people were telling you is that you need 
to clean up your own act internally. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, why it is that instead of introducing a 
provincial GST, you didn't choose instead to look at cuts in areas like 
government advertising, lease office space, government travel, travel by 
cabinet ministers, the size of your provincial cabinet, Mr. Minister, which 
has broken new records.  Had you looked, Mr. Minister, at those areas I'm 
sure you could have found cost savings of 80 to $100 million.  Why did you 
not, Mr. Minister, introduce those kinds of cost savings and spare us the 
provincial GST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, we've worked hard at reducing 
expenditures as it relates to internal government operations.  As I told 
the members of the committee yesterday, I think in the last four years, if 
numbers serves me correctly, although the numbers are in Hansard, we've 
taken the cost of running government internal, office space, and cars and 
all those kinds of things, and paper and the salaries of civil servants 
from about 24.3 per cent four or five years ago down to it representing a 
15 per cent of the cost to the taxpayers this year, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I would suggest to you that you might 
try cutting your printing budget by two-thirds and save yourself $25 
million.  Or you might look at cutting your advertising budget by 75 per 
cent and saving yourself about $16 million.  Why don't you try reducing 
four cabinet ministers on that side and saving yourself about $800,000? 
 
Mr. Minister, why don't you look at those kinds of cost savings 
initiatives?  Try to spare yourself, Mr. Minister, the $590,000 that you 
spent on an image consultant from Toronto last year.  Try to spare the 
taxpayers that as well.  Those are some of the areas, Mr. Minister, where 
you could be saving money. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question with respect to the 
provincial GST.  And that is as it relates, Mr. Minister, to the impact on 
students in my constituency.  I represent several thousand students in my 
riding, Mr. Minister.  They are now going to have to pay a provincial GST 



 

 

on all their textbook purchases, Mr. Minister.  Can you tell me, Mr. 
Minister, what is the total provincial GST that will be paid on textbooks 
by students as a result of this year's budget, and did you consider the 
negative impact that would have on students, Mr. Minister, when you decided 
to levy a GST on reading materials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, the members of the committee, the 
revenue from sales tax on reading materials, our estimates are that it will 
be something in the order of $7.4 million.  And because we do want to make 
sure that university libraries and school libraries and school boards that 
are buying textbooks, literacy, if you like, and reading, is not impaired 
in any way, we have set up a special provision in the budget to provide for 
additional funding to offset the increased costs that might occur to school 
boards and universities as it relates to buying textbooks and those kinds 
of things, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, as is your wont, you have once again 
not answered my question.  You know full well, Mr, Minister, that books 
that are purchased by individuals will still be taxed.  Books being 
purchased by students in my constituency and across this province are being 
taxed. 
 
How much, Mr. Minister, will students taking post-secondary education 
courses have to fork out in provincial GST in this budget year to cover 
this 7 per cent levy that your government is forcing them to pay on 
textbooks?  What will it cost them, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have that kind of number nor 
do we have it available to us, to be honest to you and members of the 
committee. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this just bears out again the fact that 
you have not done an impact study on the effect that the provincial GST 
will have on various sectors of our economy, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want you, Mr. Minister, in this House to justify for us, how can you 
possibly justify a tax on reading materials and a tax on knowledge which 
violates all the principles that we ought to be working for in our society? 
 
It is fundamental, Mr. Minister, that in a democracy we have an informed 
population.  It is fundamental, Mr. Minister, that we encourage people to 
read and that we fight illiteracy in this province and in this country. 
 
A tax on reading, Mr. Minister, goes against all those directions that we 
ought to be working towards.  You tell us, Mr. Minister, why should 
students or members of the general public have to put up with a tax on 
reading materials, Mr. Minister?  This is an unprecedented tax in Canada.  
Why won't you at least withdraw the tax on reading materials, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, this party, this Premier, this 
government, this caucus, these members here feel as strongly, maybe even 
stronger, I would argue . . . I personally feel very strongly about the 
importance of reading and literacy and what it means to society.  So I 



 

 

don't need any lectures from the hon. member nor does this caucus.  That's 
precisely why we moved to put the additional funding in the budget, not 
only an increase for the libraries, okay, but over and above it to offset 
the cost of that 7 per cent. 
 
And you see, the hon. member is a bit pious and sanctimonious today, as it 
relates to a tax on reading materials, you see.  But when he was in the 
legislature and his party was in the legislature in the '70s, what was his 
approach then?  Was he raising it in question period every day then, about 
the taxes on reading materials that we'd had in this province -- okay? 
 
In fact it wasn't until 1975 that there was a full exemption for all books, 
magazines, and periodicals.  Where was he in '74, '73, '72, and '71, Mr. 
Chairman?  Do you recall that being the issue of the day in this 
legislature?  Do you recall then that member or other members of the NDP 
raising it to embarrass their party that was in government then?  Why now?  
Because it's maybe appropriate for some politics -- is that the issue?  Is 
that the issue, Mr. Chairman? 
 
You see this isn't unprecedented like the hon. member would like to try and 
to suggest to the people.  No question, a difficult one, but don't try and 
give us this malarkey about it being unprecedented.  I say where were you 
in the early '70s?  Where were you?  Yes, you were cowering like a church 
mouse over here.  Whatever Roy said went, that was it, right? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Members are not to use other members' names in the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Where was the hon. member when libraries were paying 
tax from 1937 to 1975, Mr. Chairman?  Where was he? Where was he, Mr. 
Chairman?  And where was he on January 1 when the federal government put 
the tax on reading materials.  Was he lobbying?  Was he raising the issue, 
Mr. Chairman?  No he wasn't, because it didn't suit his narrow political 
agenda or his party's narrow political agenda. 
 
I'm telling you, Mr. Chairman, and members of this committee, if he really 
believed in what he was saying he would have been on a crusade last year 
and again all this year, as that tax went on federally, first and foremost.  
And of course if we harmonize, then we're in the same position. 
 
Where was he? If he's such a person of principle and his party is such a 
party of principle, where was he?  Where were the voices, Mr. Chairman?  
The silence was deafening and this is nothing but . . . these questions 
just drip with hypocrisy, Mr. Chairman.  That's what they do. 
 
I want to get into the record on literacy and reading.  Per capita funding 
for libraries, higher than any other western province -- $5.63 per capita, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Education development fund, established by this government.  Lots of books 
for the libraries under that fund.  The URDF (university renewal and 
development fund), special funding from that special fund over the last 
five years for our libraries. 



 

 

 
It was this government, this administration that took the lead across 
Canada on literacy, not only in the conventional sense, but using computer 
technology with the IBM PALS (Principles of the Alphabet Literacy System) 
program.  It was this government that introduced the reading campaigns, Mr. 
Chairman.  It is this government that has said we will make sure that our 
libraries and our schools are left whole because of the tax. 
 
Now the very easy approach would be, because of how strong we all feel 
about reading materials, to exempt them from the tax.  We took the other 
approach by giving those areas additional money to offset the tax.  Why?  
Because if you start to exempt the tax, you lose the basis for going to 
harmonization.  Or one of the reasons for going to harmonization in the 
first place is to make it simpler for the consumer.  It is taxed federally. 
 
Then the question is, well should this be in or out?  Has it got both 
federal and provincial, or just federal?  That's one of the reasons -- make 
it simpler. 
 
But the second reason, Mr. Chairman, if you're going to start looking at 
exemptions, yes, many people would say reading material should be exempt.  
Some people would say there are many forms of reading material that they 
think people maybe ought to pay tax on.  Others, Mr. Chairman, would say, 
if you're going to start making exemptions -- which is a point that quite 
frankly I think has much merit -- if you're going to start allowing 
exemptions from the tax then some would say well what about home heating 
fuel or what about baby clothes? 
 
You see, everybody has their best example, so it becomes a question of 
fairness.  If you start eliminating the tax for some, some others would 
want it.  So let's do it across the piece.  Keep it simpler.  Offset those 
who need the offset which we have done in this case.  And as well, we've 
continued our very major support for reading and literacy and libraries in 
this province.  And this appropriation that these motions speak to, Mr. 
Chairman, speaks very much to that commitment. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member from Saskatoon South says I 
should be shaking in my boots.  You can always tell, Mr. Chairman, when the 
Minister of Finance is in a tight corner because he likes to come out 
fighting, Mr. Minister.  But actions speak louder than words, Mr. Minister.  
Your government's actions speak louder than your words, sir, because you, 
sir, are the person who has put a tax on reading materials in this 
province. 
 
Just try buying the Leader-Post or the Star-Phoenix.  I ask you, do you pay 
the 7 per cent GST on it?  The answer is  
 Dyes.  When your son or daughter, Mr. Minister, goes to buy a textbook in 
their university studies, do they pay the provincial GST on it?  The answer 
is yes.  If I go down to a local bookstore to purchase a novel, Mr. 
Minister, do I pay the GST on it?  The answer is yes.  So don't tell us, 
Mr. Minister, that you are trying to advance reading and knowledge in this 



 

 

province because your tax Bill demonstrates that that's not the case, Mr. 
Minister.  So let's just own up to the reality that we're facing here. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the minister says that the New Democratic Party imposed 
a tax on reading materials in the 1970s.  Well I want to give the minister 
a little history lesson.  It was the Thatcher Liberals in the 1960s, Mr. 
Minister, that imposed a tax on reading materials, and we took it off in 
the 1970s, Mr. Minister.  We took it off. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to say to you, Mr. Minister . . . I want to turn 
to another area now, and that is the impact of this tax on low income 
families in the province.  Mr. Minister, in the remarks you just made you 
raised the question, well if we're going to exempt reading materials, why 
don't . . . what about an exemption on home heating fuel?  What about an 
exemption on clothing? 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, that's exactly what we're suggesting.  Why don't you, 
Mr. Minister, why don't you exempt children's clothing from your provincial 
GST?  Why don't you, Mr. Minister, exempt natural gas and electricity from 
your provincial GST, Mr. Minister?  This is exactly what we're arguing in 
this Assembly, that you should not be taxing the necessities of life, Mr. 
Minister.  You should not be levying a tax on those kind of essential 
items. 
 
Now I want to ask you, sir: have you analysed what the impact of this tax 
will be on low income families in this province, sir?  Because I want to 
say to you, Mr. Minister, that this is a regressive form of taxation.  It's 
a very regressive form of taxation.  Consumption taxes are always 
regressive taxes, and those on the lower end of the income ladder 
consistently pay more in tax than middle and higher income earners do. 
 
Now you have a limited scheme, Mr. Minister, in effect that provides a 
rebate of $50 a quarter with respect to families who have children, based 
on the number of children in the family.  But there is no rebate, sir, for 
low income single individuals. 
 
So I want to use the example of a disabled person.  Have you analysed, Mr. 
Minister, what the impact of this tax will be on persons with disability 
and on low income single individuals in the province of Saskatchewan?  And 
have you also analysed, sir, what the impact of this tax will be on low 
income families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, could . . . to help answer that 
question, could the hon. member give us a definition of what low income is 
-- his definition or some established definition, please. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'll use as the guide-line those 
families who are living below the Statistics Canada poverty line. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- There is no such thing. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well the Minister of Social Services has just said there is 
no such thing.  Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I'm amazed that the Minister of 



 

 

Social Services would say that, but for the benefit of the Minister of 
Social Services and the Minister of Finance, the numbers are as follows, 
sir.  I would have thought you would know these just as a matter of course. 
 
But for a family living in my riding in Saskatoon, if they're . . . for a 
single person the poverty line this year is $13,071; for two people the 
poverty line is $17,719; for a family size of three, the poverty line is 
$22,520. 
 
The Chairman: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'd asked the Minister of Social 
Services to allow the member to make his comments. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For a family of four, Mr. 
Minister, the poverty line in Saskatoon or Regina is $25,928, and for a 
family of five, $28,329, Mr. Minister.  And this is the Statistics Canada 
low income cut-offs, Mr. Minister, used by the National Council on Welfare 
and widely recognized I might say to the Minister of Social Services, 
across Canada as the official basis for the poverty line in this country. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: what impact will your provincial 
goods and services tax have on these families and on single individuals?  
Have you examined that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Yes we have, because we did want this to be fair, Mr. 
Chairman, and progressive.  We did not want to have those on low and modest 
income families penalized because of the increased taxes they would pay on 
services or on food, restaurant meals or any of the things that occur with 
the base broadening, whether it be on April 1 or on January 1, '92. 
 
I thank the hon. member for reading into the record the examples that he 
has given us.  It would help us define what lower income or modest income 
people earnings . . . what they might have to have.  And so let's look at 
the -- I think the top one you gave us was $25,000 or one of the top -- two 
plus two, two children, okay?  A family of four with two children earning 
$25,000 I think was the numbers he used. 
 
So let's examine what that would be.  Now I don't have the numbers 
precisely for $25,000 but I'll give you for a family of four -- 2 children, 
2 adults -- at 20,000 and at 30,000.  I think the committee will see that 
this is indeed a very fair tax reform.  At 20,000, the additional -- and 
this is under full harmonization come January 1, '92, albeit the families 
today . . . the cheques have already gone in the mail for the first 
quarter, for this year, Mr. Chairman; but under full harmonization -- so we 
can see the full impact -- two adults plus two children earning a family 
income of $20,000, they would pay an additional $277 in sales tax.  They 
will get from the provincial government, through the federal computers, 
$200 per child back for a total of $400.  So they are $123 better off with 
that family tax credit. 
 
Well the member now could say, but what about 25,000?  Are they still 
better off at 25?  Well, as I said earlier, I don't have the numbers.  So 
let's go to the $30,000.  Let's suppose his numbers are too low.  Let's 
suppose my definition for a family of two plus two is $30,000, Mr. 



 

 

Chairman.  I think they need to be kept . . . (inaudible) . . . at 30,000.  
Well how does that work out?  Well at 30,000, they would spend $310 more.  
They would get $340 by way of family tax credit, still $30 to the good 
because of the family tax credit.  Not only are they not paying additional 
tax at the $25,000 level for that family, but as well at the $30,000 level, 
they are still better off for that family of four. 
 
Now that's what I call fairness.  You see, the NDP opposite like to think 
that they somehow have a monopoly on fairness.  Well that's a bunch of 
boloney.  There has been more programs put in place, more support -- never 
mind programs -- just plain political support for families in this province 
than we've ever seen, Mr. Chairman.  And this is just another example that 
speaks to that. 
 
And I think the hon. member, based on his own numbers, based on his own 
numbers, would have to say this is very fair for the children and families 
of this province, Mr. Chairman, on lower and modest incomes . . . at 
$30,000, still paying less tax than they would have, had they not had the 
rebates and the tax not changed, Mr. Chairman.  Now that's what I call 
fairness. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister didn't answer the second part of 
my question.  I acknowledged the rebates at the beginning, although I thank 
him for the details on the numbers. 
 
My question to, sir, specifically is with respect to low income persons who 
do not have children.  Why did you not provide them with a rebate, sir?  
Why are they not provided with a rebate, and what will the impact of the 
tax be on those persons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as it relates to singles, single 
parents, seniors.  Single parents obviously with children, the numbers 
would be not unlike what I read into the record, even better I suspect. 
Relative to the offset from the additional tax they would pay, that single 
child would be eligible for up to $200 by way of the family tax credit. 
 
But one other point I would like to make -- because the reality is, in this 
province we do have a very progressive tax system, Mr. Chairman.  Very, 
very progressive.  And at those income levels in that 20 . . . below 
20,000; the 25, 30, $35,000 even -- if you look at the taxes and charges, 
the kinds of things that we all have to pay on a yearly basis, the kind 
that are considered the essentials like the provincial income tax, health 
premiums, retail sales taxes, gasoline taxes, you know, your car insurance, 
your telephone bill, your heating bill, those kinds of things, and you add 
them all up and you look at an interprovincial comparison at those levels 
that I talked about, Saskatchewan comes out very, very well.  We're first, 
second, third, fourth lowest in the country in all of those areas most 
often, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Part of that, the reason for that, is things like the family tax credit. 
Other reasons are we have no health-care premiums in this province. Other 
reasons are we have very reasonable car insurance rates and telephone 
rates. Other reasons are we have a very good SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan) 



 

 

program that we've moved up from 25 to $80 a month, which I think the hon. 
member would acknowledge. We have a family income program that's been 
topped up at $100 per month.  We've got the Saskatchewan tax reduction that 
remains in place today even with the credit. 
 
The Saskatchewan tax reduction remains in place today that amounts to 
something in the order of $52 million in benefits, and of course for the 
seniors, the heritage program that we've put in place. 
 
The point I'm making is, Mr. Chairman, albeit families get a special 
credit, the reality is, if you look at all other programs that I've just 
talked about including the tax reduction, looked at all the taxes and 
charges, I think you will see, as the hon. member will acknowledge, that on 
those people with lower and modest incomes -- because I think, you know, 
modest maybe is a better word to describe when you're starting to get 25 
and 30; it's quite a decent income -- you will see that living in 
Saskatchewan is still a very attractive place even with harmonization, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, once again the minister didn't answer 
my question.  Mr. Minister, my question is very simply, why did you not 
provide rebates for single individuals and married couples without children 
living below the poverty line?  They are going to bear the full brunt of 
this provincial GST, sir.  Why were they not eligible for a rebate?  We see 
that kind of a rebate available through the federal GST, Mr. Minister, but 
no rebate by your government provincially.  Why, Mr. Minister, did you at 
least not provide those individuals and married couples with a rebate? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can only repeat what I said earlier.  I'm not going 
to go through the litany again.  But if you factor in the Saskatchewan tax 
reduction and some of those other programs I talked about, but primarily 
the tax reduction, you will see, even with the tax changes, which you . . . 
maybe if I could get the hon. member to listen. 
 
Even with the tax changes, we are either first or second or third or fourth 
lowest in these 20-25-30-$35,000 levels when taxes and charges are included 
in this province, compared to interprovincially.  And I think that speaks 
very well to the progressive nature of tax policy and the cost of living in 
this province, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Chairperson, I have a supplementary question to my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, I want to lay out for 
you a case example of how your policy is affecting people. 
 
I have a constituent in my riding who is 63 years of age.  She is a mother 
of nine children and a grandmother of several grandchildren.  Her husband 
has recently divorced her, and she is presently living on social 
assistance.  Her income is less than $4,000 per annum and this lady lives 
in a senior citizen high-rise. 
 
Mr. Minister, she is not eligible for a tax credit to offset the provincial 



 

 

goods and services tax and the federal goods and services tax.  This lady, 
who has spent her life raising her children and being a mother like a lot 
of other women have done in this province, has been subjected to food banks 
because of social assistance levels for single people.  She is not in a 
position to get a job at the age of 63 years of age. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, why it is that your government is prepared 
to have a tax credit to families -- and I understand that -- but there are 
low income, older women living on a subsistence allowance who aren't 
eligible.  Why is that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, relative to the particular case that 
the hon. member has raised, the social assistance program budget has been 
topped up to offset some of the increased costs that those recipients might 
face that we would pay on their behalf -- things like shelter and 
utilities, those kinds of things.  It's been offset both federally to the 
tune of about two million and provincially to the tune of about 750 or 
three-quarters of a million. 
 
As well, I suspect that that person, although I didn't hear all the 
details, may be eligible for the seniors' heritage program, and of course 
probably the subsidy that's . . . I don't know whether you'd consider it 
really a subsidy, but what society is doing for that person by way of 
subsidized public housing is probably the biggest beneficial part of what 
she receives from the taxpayers, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there are a number of people in this 
province that live in subsidized housing.  If this woman was a single 
parent living in subsidized housing, she would be eligible for the tax 
credit.  You say that there's been a small increase in social assistance 
living, and I don't know whether or not that's true.  But the point is that 
that increase, the small increase, will be for all social assistance 
recipients in the province to deal with rising costs. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, specifically I want to get back to your tax credit 
policy.  This lady lives on less than $4,000 per year.  In fact, as I 
understand it, Mr. Minister, I think she lives on less than $3,400 per 
year.  The point is that under the federal GST legislation she's not 
eligible for a tax credit because she is too poor.  The point is that under 
your particular legislation she's not eligible for a GST tax credit because 
she's not a person who has children who are under the age of 18.  
Nevertheless, Mr. Minister, she is faced with the same problems the rest of 
us are, that there are certain goods and services that she must purchase 
that will have the provincial goods and services tax on them. 
 
So my question, Mr. Minister, is why is it that your policy has not been 
extended to low income Saskatchewan citizens like the lady I've described?  
Why is it only applicable to people having children?  Why not single 
elderly people or couples who are elderly or couples who are young with no 
children?  Because each of us has a certain number of goods and services 
that we have to consume.  That's how we get by in our day-to-day life, and 



 

 

this tax applies to those minimum goods and services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, hon. member, this particular individual who you 
talk about with a 3,400 or $4,000 a year income to expend, as I've said 
earlier, there's been offsets provided in the social assistance area.  But 
more importantly, I think if you look at your own example, based on those 
numbers . . . and this lady obviously would be a very, very good manager to 
be living on 3,400 to $4,000 a year.  So I would suspect that this very day 
by far and away the majority of her purchases already are non-taxable ones 
like food, for example. 
 
Any incremental spending on those kinds of numbers . . . I mean, like I 
said, she must be a very good manager.  Any incremental spending and hence 
any incremental tax that would be paid on newly taxed items either as of 
April 1 or January 1 would, quite frankly, have to be very, very minimal.  
Because even if it was all spent on newly taxable items which is, quite 
frankly, impossible, it would be $238. 
 
But I doubt that that lady is buying $3,400 of restaurant meals or snack 
foods or any of those kinds of things that are now newly taxable.  So I 
suspect in that example that you give us that her . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . or $3,400 worth of books would be a lot of books.  
There's no question about it.  I suspect that the offset through the social 
assistance would probably cover that very good manager who's expending 
3,500 to $4,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I have never heard such an appalling 
commentary on trying to defend and trying to propose, as you were doing . . 
. you were trying to propose that this PST, or provincial GST, will have 
virtually no impact on this low income lady of 63 years of age who's living 
on $3,400 a year.  What absolute nonsense, Mr. Minister. 
 
This woman is going to spend a significant amount of her budget on natural 
gas.  She's going to spend a significant amount of her budget on 
electricity, Mr. Minister.  She's obviously going to spend part of her 
budget on clothing, Mr. Minister.  She is obviously going to spend a 
certain amount on reading materials, even if she just buys the newspaper 
once a week.  Why should she have to pay tax on these, Mr. Minister, and 
why should she not be rebated?  That's the fundamental question.  And why 
should so many other people who are in the same position not be rebated, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
I wonder if you could answer that question and if you could also tell us, 
sir, while you're on your feet, in fact what increases there are going to 
be to social assistance recipients in the province.  Because all I see 
under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, Mr. Minister, is a reduction in the 
total allocation for SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan).  So if there are 
going to be increases, I wonder if you could indicate what those are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I said earlier, Mr. Chairman, I admire a lady like 
this who can live on $4,000 a year, Mr. Chairman.  I think that's, I mean, 
obviously a very prudent manager.  That's why I said most of her 
expenditures . . . I mean this lady, I doubt, is not spending a lot of 



 

 

money on new clothes or cars or reading material or snack foods or 
restaurant meals.  I doubt that.  Now if I am proven otherwise, I mean on 
$4,000 you just don't have a lot of disposable income to spend on things 
like restaurant meals and snack foods. 
 
Her additional cost on the newspaper would be 4 cents a day, as the hon. 
member might point out.  Her electricity, her shelter costs, things that we 
would pay on her behalf through social assistance are offset, as I said 
earlier. 
 
You see, why this tax has a fair amount of progressivity built into it by 
the very nature of it is it taxes the big spenders.  I mean the people who 
want to spend 2 and $300,000 a year -- guess what?  They pay a lot of tax 
in absolute dollars. 
 
Obviously, if you're a person who's in the middle, who is making a decent 
income, and you know, we can use your numbers -- over $25,000 for example 
or 35, 40 -- who does want to spend a little less and save a little more.  
Well they're not penalized, Mr. Chairman, because they don't pay the tax if 
they don't spend it.  Obviously somebody who's down on this very, very, 
very modest incomes just don't have the money to spend on any new taxable 
items, I would make the observation. 
 
In fact I empathize with this lady and I admire the fact that she can 
manage on that kind of dollars.  And I think probably the public housing 
is, for example, very, very helpful to that kind of individual. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I have just one more question for you but I think today we 
have witnessed one of the fundamental differences, sir, between your party 
and ours. 
 
Mr. Minister, for you to turn around and say about a woman who is being 
forced to use the food bank, for you to ignore the suffering that she is 
facing, for you to ignore the poverty that she lives in, and for you to 
somehow justify your policies by saying what a good manager she is to only 
live on $3,400 a year, Mr. Minister, when it's the policies of this 
government that have put her in that situation is absolutely appalling, 
sir. 
 
And I tell you that we will not allow people to be forced to live in that 
kind of poverty if we assume office after the next election.  No way, sir.  
No way to your way, I say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Now I want to ask you one final question.  And that is, 
sir, with respect to the impact that this tax will have on jobs.  You have 
refused so far in this debate on your budget, sir, to indicate that you 
have done a cost-benefit analysis on the impact that this tax will have on 
consumer spending. 
 
And we argue that there will be a lot of money that consumers spend leaving 
Saskatchewan, particularly in border communities, as a result of this tax.  



 

 

We are arguing, sir, that people are already spending less in the province 
because of this tax.  They're reducing their purchases.  And you have 
failed to do an impact analysis on that. 
 
We have asked you about what kind of an impact analysis you have done on 
prospective bankruptcies as a result of this tax in the clothing sector, 
the restaurant sector, the tourist sector, and the hotel sector.  And 
you've refused to answer that question and you clearly have done no impact 
study, sir. 
 
Now I want to ask you whether you've done an impact study when it comes to 
jobs.  Because we believe that this tax is going to be devastating in terms 
of its impact on employment in the economy.  So I wonder if you could 
indicate to us how many jobs will be lost in sectors like the clothing 
industry, the restaurant industry, and the tourist industry. 
 
This provincial GST is a tax on jobs, sir.  We believe that you're very 
unwise to pursue this policy.  What's the impact on jobs in these various 
sectors? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all I have stated several 
times in this legislature relative to jobs under full harmonization, yes 
some sectors have a difficult time in the transitional period.  But in a 
macro sense if you look at all the sectors of our economy the gain is 
clear.  It's a 1.6 per cent overall under full harmonization.  That 
translates into 5,000 jobs.  I've said that several times here. 
 
And that's because businesses become more profitable, more competitive.  
They can expand, hire more employees, pay better wages, all of those kinds 
of things.  Two hundred and sixty million dollars more off their bottom 
lines makes them more competitive, creates economic expansion.  Wealth 
creation.  I know the opposition can't get their heads around that. 
 
The personal disposable income numbers, the hon. member says we haven't 
laid those out.  Mr. Chairman, I have laid those out not once, not twice, 
not three times, but several times in the last three days in the debate on 
this Bill.  Growth in personal disposable income 1991, 2.2. per cent; 1992, 
3.8 per cent. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, this is getting to be an abuse of this 
committee.  Three days running on interim supply, three days running.  The 
same questions being asked over and over and over.  We have allowed a lot 
of latitude in terms of the detail we've got into.  This Bill has dragged 
on far longer than need be for the taxpayers' best interest, Mr. Chairman. 
 
They talk about these family tax credits, but if we don't get this interim 
supply Bill, I don't know whether we've got the authority to make the 
payments that are already in the mail, Mr. Chairman.  Three days.  Twelve 
previous Appropriation Bills, Mr. Chairman, twelve previous, one day at 
most, ten minutes for many.  The last twelve, only a couple went over one 
day.  This is the fourth session we've had in this legislature.  And they 



 

 

ask the same questions over and over and over, Mr. Chairman -- 2.3 and 3.8 
on personal disposable income, that's the 15th time I think that I've read 
that into the record. 
 
 DThe public treasury is being abused by this process to do nothing more 
than hold up paying the very welfare payments the hon. member so piously 
suggests that he cares more about than we do.  I say, Mr. Chairman, let's 
get on and make the payments on behalf of those families out there who are 
waiting for some of these benefits, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Minister, I will try and have a 
calming effect on the minister because I'm quite worried about his health.  
He has had several outbursts in the legislature and I know his blood 
pressure is rising.  And the way one deals with stress is to take a deep 
breath and, you know, to calm oneself down.  And maybe if the minister 
would answer the questions that are being posed to the minister, the 
minister might improve his blood pressure. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my colleagues have asked you several questions and they 
have asked you to table the economic impact studies, and you've refused to 
do that.  And so we will continue to ask you questions about the economic 
impact upon our economy, of the provincial goods and services tax.  If you 
were to be forthright with the opposition, I'm sure we could go on to other 
issues in this legislature. 
 
And the other thing I want to remind the minister, when we were first 
elected in October of 1986, I don't believe we had our first budget until 
some time in June.  The minister had no problem, the minister of the day 
had no problem spending Saskatchewan taxpayers' money without the 
appropriate legislative authority.  And so I'd just like to remind the 
minister that his comments that because we don't have this interim supply 
will somehow impede his ability to send out cheques, is simply not relevant 
to what in fact the government has done in the past. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what I do want to talk to you about is the whole area of 
education.  Now you will recall, as Minister of Education, and you will 
recall as Finance minister last year, you talked about the importance of 
education to our province's citizens if we were to remain competitive in 
the global economy. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if you look at this year's budget, what we have in fact 
seen is a very, very small increase to education.  We have seen a cut of 50 
per cent in the educational development fund and we have seen in many rural 
communities a cut in grants to those rural school boards.  As a result of 
that, rural school boards across the province have laid off teachers, they 
have cut non-teaching positions, they've increased the mill rate, and 
they're presently involved in school closures. 
 
Given your rhetoric, Mr. Minister, given the rhetoric that if we are to 
compete in the world economy, how do you explain the cuts in education that 
we've witnessed, the cuts in quality of education that we've witnessed, and 
a pulling out of jobs in our rural communities? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I think 
because this government recognizes education as a priority -- consistently 
it's been one of the two departments that's had the large increases in 
expenditures each year for the past nine, ten years since this 
administration has been in office -- our commitment to education . . . 
though maybe just money isn't by itself a good indicator.  I mean we tend 
to use more money equals better education.  I think there are a number of 
other elements to how you determine quality and how you measure it. 
 
But even if the measure is, as the hon. member suggests, more money, just 
keep throwing more money, perhaps she could tell the committee, if three 
and a half per cent increase in operating grants this year isn't enough, 
maybe she could tell the legislature what her party's plan is and what her 
position is.  Should it be six and a half or eight and a half or nine and a 
half?  Come clean with the public. 
 
As the opposition critic, explain their position to the public.  We'd like 
to know.  We've laid ours out clearly in education -- core curriculum, K to 
12, the SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation) network, 
distance education, regional colleges, a new agriculture college, a new 
technical institute building in Prince Albert, new schools across the 
province, consistent high spending in those areas, Mr. Chairman.  I mean I 
could go on and on. 
 
Are we picking up our fair share of the reading program, Mr. Chairman?  
We're not off-loading.  We didn't chose in the face of federal off-loading 
to off-load onto universities.  We've kept our grants high even when the 
cheque coming from the federal government was decreasing.  I think we used 
virtually any measure, even money, and other measures.  Our record on 
education is one we're proud of. 
 
How are we doing on drop-outs?  Now there's a measurement that's not money, 
obviously.  Ultimately it's an expression of a number of things including 
dollars for programs.  How are we doing there?  How are we doing in terms 
of percentage of students finishing grade 8 who go on to finish grade 12, 
you know, that don't drop out along the way. 
 
Well let's back up.  In '66 and in '70 and in '74 when other 
administrations were here, in '78 . . . well let's look at the numbers on 
drop-outs in '66, '70, '74, and '78 and see how they were doing.  How many 
students were going on to finish grade 12 that got to grade 8 and could 
make that final four years and get a high school diploma?  Thirty-nine per 
cent in 1966.  That's 25 years ago.  Not a great legacy.  Thirty-nine per 
cent of the kids that made it to grade 8, only 39 per cent went on to 
finish grade 12. 
 
In 1970 it had moved up to 50 per cent; '74, 55 per cent; '78, in the NDP 
years, these both in the NDP years, moved up to 57 per cent.  Obviously 
better than the 39 per cent a decade earlier.  Well what about under this 
administration, under the Progressive Conservative administration, how are 
we doing there?  In 1986, 72 per cent.  Clearly about a 15 per cent 
increase in eight years.  Now that's what I call performance from a 
Progressive Conservative administration. 



 

 

 
In 1990 it got to 75 per cent.  Well how are we doing in terms of the 
number of students that go on to finish post-secondary training?  You know, 
when I went to university -- even before the hon. member, who is younger 
than I am, went to university -- it was quite something then in a family of 
four for example, for one member to be able to go on to university or some 
post-secondary education.  Not a lot of children had the opportunity for a 
variety of reasons.  Then the issue was very much more so getting kids to 
complete their grade 12.  If they went that extra step of post-secondary 
education, that was really considered something and almost everybody knew 
about it in the community where I came from in rural Saskatchewan.  And 
that's not because they didn't consider education important, because they 
did consider education important. 
 
But 20 and 25 years later, now families, society, and this government 
consider it important not just to measure how many complete their grade 12, 
but how many go on to post-secondary education, and how many get into 
university and get a degree from their universities, our fine universities 
in this province. 
 
Well what are some of the facts as to how we're doing in this last decade 
under a Progressive Conservative administration of having not only more 
people finish and get their grade 12 but go on to university?  Well let's 
look at some of the numbers. 
 
Approximately 28,000 full-time and part-time students were enrolled in 
Saskatchewan's universities in '89-90.  Now there's no question we hear 
about quotas.  The opposition almost daily tells us about cut-backs, we're 
not spending enough, spend more, spend more, spend more.  Every year I've 
been in this legislature, that member, I think in fact every year she's 
been here, I think there hasn't been a year -- even when she was critic in 
different areas -- I don't think there's been a year when she hasn't said, 
you're not spending enough, the cut-backs are awful, spend more money, 
spend more money in education. 
 
Isn't that right?  Am I not right when I say that member has said year in 
and year out, you're not spending enough, there's cut-backs and it's awful 
and the quality of education is going to go downhill?  We've heard that 
kind of overblown rhetoric from the NDP every year I've been in this 
legislature. 
 
Well I'd give you the record on the number of children finishing grade 12.  
How are we doing in the last 10 years on university?  Well let's hear it.  
And yes, I say this knowing full well that there's maybe a hundred or 200 
or 300 that didn't get in because of quotas.  But in '89-90, there was 
28,000, as I said, enrolled. 
 
Is that a 5 per cent increase over the last decade?  Is that a 10 per cent 
increase?  I would say in the last decade, if we'd had a 30 or 40 per cent 
increase in enrolment at our universities, wouldn't society have said, that 
is an excellent way to go?  Obviously they view that as a high priority. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well 30 per cent . . . 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- My colleagues tell me if we'd increased enrolments 30 
per cent in a decade, we'd have done very well. 
 
Well what are the facts?  This represents -- that 28,000 enrolments I 
talked about earlier -- represents a 50 per cent increase from the '80-81 
year.  You see, I say we have that kind of increase because we believe in 
education in this province for our young people, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And I could go on and talk about the large increase, 
the 50,000 students who are enrolled in SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) programs in that same year. 
 
Mr. Chairman, our commitment to education, K to 12 education, 
post-secondary education, to literacy, to reading has been unparalleled in 
this province and that's because this administration believes in doing 
something, in having a plan, and not merely giving lip-service to 
education, ranting and raving about cut-backs.  We have a plan and we've 
done something about it and we stand behind it, Mr. Chairman.  And I hope 
they approve this Bill so we can send the cheques, which are six-twelfths, 
to the school boards with this Bill, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Chairperson, a few minutes ago the minister was 
complaining about the length of this debate.  And perhaps if the minister 
could just shorten his responses a little bit, we could get out of here. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to go back to the question that was asked, and I 
appreciate that you have given us some response in terms of your record, 
and your record in education up until 1986 was quite acceptable.  Your 
record in education was that increased costs that were incurred by our 
post-secondary institutions and our K to 12 system, in terms of inflation, 
were recognized by the province of Saskatchewan.  And I do want to 
congratulate the former minister of Education, the member from Swift 
Current.  She did an excellent job of keeping the funding to education with 
the rate of inflation.  And I can honestly say that we made progress in 
this province under the former minister of Education, the member from Swift 
Current. 
 
But that has not been the record since 1986.  Once the government was 
re-elected their spending in education fell.  And in fact, if I look at 
some press clippings from 1987 when the present Minister of Finance was the 
Education minister, we began to see cuts in spending in education.  And in 
fact the Minister of Education in this press clipping dated, Leader-Post, 
April 23, 1987, talked about a $3.3 million cut out of the $333 million the 
province spends on education.  He said at the time that that would cause no 
great hardship. 
 
(1215) 
 



 

 

Now the president of the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation at the time, 
Gerry Cooke, indicated that the cuts, along with the rising costs of goods 
and services, could mean serious cut-backs in education.  And that is in 
fact what we've seen since that budget in 1987. 
 
Now I did say, up until 1986 the government did a fairly decent job of 
continuing the work in the area of education.  We were making progress.  
Progress was made in the '70s and progress was made up until 1986. 
 
But the government's record since 1986 has not been a good one.  We have 
seen cut-backs in the K to 12 system.  We have seen cuts at the University 
of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina; and we've seen cuts in our 
vocational institutions. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you can say that great progress has been made.  But it 
hasn't been made.  And this year we will see over 300 teachers laid off in 
Saskatchewan, we will see over 100 non-teaching people laid off in 
Saskatchewan.  We are hearing about rural school closures. 
 
We are hearing -- particularly in Wapella, where the member from Moosomin 
happens to be from -- but we are hearing about these rural school closures 
all over Saskatchewan because this government has down-loaded the 
responsibility onto local property taxpayers.  And local property taxpayers 
are saying, we give up.  We are tapped out.  We can't do any more in the 
area of education.  And they're asking for the Government of Saskatchewan 
to recognize its verbal commitment to education by putting some money where 
its mouth is. 
 
Education has reached the brink.  It is on the brink of collapse.  There is 
no more fat in the K to 12 education system.  The fat is gone and we 
require some money, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now the minister says we don't have a plan; we don't have a plan.  Well I 
just want to tell the Minister of Education, we have a plan.  Call the 
election and we will put our plan to the people of this province in the 
area of education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Call the election. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, and the LEADS association (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents) has called on this 
government to begin to move to a 60/40 cost-shared arrangement.  The 
province would pay on average 60 per cent of the cost of the K to 12 
system, and the local taxpayers would pay 40 per cent. 
 
And under this government there's been a major shift.  We have moved from 
about 56 per cent paid for by the taxpayers to the province of 
Saskatchewan, to less than 48 per cent paid by the government.  And the 
rest is being raised at the local level. 
 



 

 

And when you begin that shift, Mr. Chairperson, what happens?  The local 
taxpayers say, particularly given the economic crisis in this province, we 
can't pay any more. 
 
And the school trustees, cognizant of the economic realities in their 
communities, realize they can't increase the mill rates, and so they start 
to consolidate schools, they start to cut teachers, they lay off 
non-teaching staff, and they start to cut programs. 
 
And when you cut programs, Mr. Minister, in industrial arts and home 
economics, and band and phys ed and special ed, you have a negative impact 
upon the quality of education. 
 
So my question, Mr. Minister, is why don't you put your money where your 
mouth is?  Great rhetoric on education, wonderful rhetoric.  But your 
record doesn't match the rhetoric. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Now the hon. member says our record, we haven't put 
our money where out mouth is.  That's what she says.  I read into it -- you 
see their ideas -- you know more money is the solution to everything.  
That's the idea.  We see that in NDP Ontario.  Just throw more money.  The 
bigger the government the better it must be.  More money, that's the answer 
to everything. 
 
I went through some of the indices that people use to measure quality of 
education.  And I think we've made great strides forward, not only in '83 
and '85 and '86 and '87, but right through to the present day, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Now her last remarks are particularly telling.  She talks about school 
closures potentially, rural Saskatchewan and other places.  Now this is 
classic sort of socialist stick our heads in the sand and pretend the world 
isn't changing around us.  That's classic.  It speaks volumes about the 
plan they don't have. 
 
When she waved those documents, Mr. Chairman, in front of the camera, I 
noticed they're all blank -- that she said represented their plan, that she 
said that represented their plan.  They were all blank pages.  But they'd 
xeroxed them, Mr. Chairman.  They'd xeroxed blank pages.  Can you imagine 
that?  That was their plan, xeroxed blank pages. 
 
Unlike the opposition, we have had a very proactive strategy relative to 
education in conjunction with our partners.  And it doesn't stop.  In this 
document we lay out some future questions that we collectively with our 
partners must address over the upcoming years, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And a final point about our spending -- because on many occasions we've 
heard about cut-backs, not enough; and then on another day they'll say your 
spending is out of control -- now the reality is, Mr. Chairman, one in five 
dollars, approximately one in five dollars are spent on education in this 
province -- one-fifth of the entire expenditure.  I'd say that's a pretty 
fair commitment. 
 



 

 

How does it stack up with the last 10 years?  We've heard her talk about 
inflation.  Have we kept up with inflation, she says.  Well the reality is 
on education we have spent roughly -- and I don't have the detailed numbers 
in front of me but I remember them from my days in education pretty closely 
-- we have spent in this last decade about two times the rate of inflation 
on education.  That's what the increases have been roughly -- about two 
times the rate of inflation, Mr. Chairman. 
 
 DNow, you see, some people would say that two times the rate of inflation, 
if that's been what your increase has been, they would say not enough, it's 
been cut back, cut back, cut back.  Now some taxpayers say if you're 
spending increases are approaching two and three times the rate of 
inflation, some say it's out of control.  They haven't even said the same 
thing. 
 
Now which is it?  Are we spending too much, about right, or not enough?  I 
say two times the rate of inflation I think is a handsome increase.  More 
importantly, it's been what they've been doing with the money and we are 
getting good value for the dollar. 
 
The trouble with the NDP and their numbers as we saw yesterday in this 
House in spades, we can't trust the numbers they bring.  They bring either 
wrong numbers or even when they bring the right numbers . . . in fact I 
think I know what the problem is.  I think I know what the problem is, Mr. 
Chairman.  I think I know what the problem is.  Some of these people, 
unfortunately, didn't have the advantage of education in the '80s under 
Progressive Conservative administration.  They were products of the '60s 
when the record was not so good. 
 
And obviously, it's unfortunate that society wasn't able to provide them 
with a strong foundation in things like mathematics -- mathematics where we 
learn that the decimal point is important.  For example, if you don't 
understand how to read a number like dollars point zero seven five, some 
can conclude that that represents 75 cents.  However, if you have had some 
mathematics you will understand that that is seven and a half cents. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We learned that in kindergarten. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Some say they learned that in kindergarten.  Anyways, 
Mr. Chairman, we have made our commitment by every measure in spades to 
education and will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, Mr. Chairperson, I'll be raising some questions to the 
minister in regards to education and Metis and non-status Indians.  First 
of all, before I start making my comments, I was listening to the minister, 
Mr. Chairperson, and I was actually fairly appalled in some of his 
comments. 
 
First of all he wants to shorten the debate, then he goes on and on on 
rhetoric.  The last little comment that he says is that we're back in the 
'60s and so on.  He forgets that it was the Liberal government who were a 
disaster in this province in education institutions in the '60s and not the 
NDP.  He forgets . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, and also a lot 



 

 

of those same Liberals that are sitting across over there in the Tory ranks 
today, those were the ones that wreaked disaster in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So in regards to our education system, I think the minister 
hasn't really learned from the history of our own education system, and he 
forgets that it's some of his fellow Liberals who are now Tories that were 
part of this history.  So he should maybe go back to school and read a 
little bit of his own history. 
 
And in regards to learning how to count, well we don't need to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan on how well you've been able to count.   On one year 
you were out by $800 million, so we don't need to make any more comments on 
that. 
 
But what I'm interested in, Mr. Minister, is this.  What I'm interested in 
is this about your government.  I think in your government what we're 
seeing is a real lack of compassion.  I think what we're seeing is a 
government that completely pays no attention to people in need.  When you 
look at people in Saskatchewan, whether it's children and poverty in 
Saskatchewan or whether we look at students who are trying hard now to make 
a living and go to school, what we see is a government that is attacking 
their means of making a living in the future and they're attacking their 
education base. 
 
And more particularly, Mr. Chairperson, the whole area of non-status Indian 
and Metis persons -- and I will provide a little bit of an historical 
record for the minister because he does not seem to relate much to the 
actual history of Saskatchewan, so I'll give him a little bit of background 
on it. 
 
The background that . . . I was given information by Martin Durocher from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, who is part of the Gabriel Dumont student association 
organization.  And they'd like to organize, Mr. Minister, as a response to 
the help that they had been receiving from this government, and there has 
been tremendous cut-backs in the past few years as it relates to . . . I'll 
give this history. 
 
Prior to 1983, in '82 when an NDP government was around, there were 
bursaries for the students.  The NDP government of the day knew that 
non-status Indian and Metis people came from a background where the 
majority of them were unemployed.  And in many cases, therefore, that help 
was there.  We had a proper bursary program called the NRIM program, 
initially the non-registered Indian and Metis program, and later on it 
became to be the non-status Indian and Metis program, the NSIM. 
 
So that there was help for bursaries and they didn't have to go to the 
loans department to be able to get help.  I remember starting university 
back in 1965 where I had to get a . . . I did a student loan for a few 
years and I had to pay it back and so on.  When we were around, we helped 
the students out because we knew in many cases that they did not have the 
money to be able to pay for their education.  So we helped the students out 



 

 

at that time. 
 
By 1983 there was changes, and that's when the changes come.  First of all 
the NSIM program was taken away from the Metis people and the non-status 
Indian people.  They used to run that program.  At a time when you talk 
about giving greater self-government, it's all pure rhetoric because at 
that time you took that program away from them, which was under their 
control. 
 
That was not bad enough.  You started to have a program which in the long 
run will lead to greater debt in the same way that you put a burden of debt 
on this province.  In 1983, for example, and the information that was sent 
to me by Mr. Martin Durocher, he says that the amount that they had to pay 
that was eligible for remission was $1,732.50.  But what was not eligible 
for remission and the debt that could be incurred was $8,610.  That was in 
1983.  So if you were not eligible for remission, your debt . . . Metis and 
non-status Indian students would have a debt of $8,610. 
 
That wasn't enough.  Your government in 1985 . . . I'm giving you these 
statistics based on a student with three children and going for a period of 
two years.  I'm using a two-year example in this thing because in many 
cases you have forced out a lot of the Metis and non-status Indian students 
by the third and fourth year.  But in 1985 what was eligible for remission 
was $2,970.  But what was not eligible for remission was $14,760.  That 
would be the total debt incurred if you were not eligible for remission.  
That was in 1985. 
 
(1230) 
 
When I looked at 1986, this stat had jumped up to . . . what was eligible 
for remission was $2,970.  What was not eligible was $29,520 by 1986 -- 
$29,520.  By 1990 this wasn't bad enough.  What was not eligible for 
remission by 1990 was the same -- 29,520.  But the eligibility for 
remission at that time was 10,260.  And they are telling me now it's even 
getting worse for this year.  I don't have the records for 1990-91; I've 
provided you the records for 1990. 
 
What the people are telling me is this.  It's really tough to go to school 
when you don't have the money and the background that a lot of the people . 
. . some of the people have in this province, some of the richer people 
have in this province.  It's very, very difficult to go to school.  In many 
situations the lack of money forces a lot of these students not to go to 
school.  And a lot of them, there's becoming to be less and less people 
being able to go to school, basically because they say they don't have the 
money. 
 
I heard your rhetoric just a while ago; you said you believe in education.  
But you seem not to believe in education for Metis and non-status Indian 
people.  It seems to me that not only are you creating so much great debt 
for the people of the province by your PST on top of your GST, now you're 
putting a debt burden on the students that make it very extremely difficult 
to go to school and continue with their education, although they know that 
in many cases the only way they'll be able to get a job is to have a good 



 

 

education. 
 
Mr. Minister, how is it that you can continue to say that you are 
supporting education when indeed you are putting a lot of these people in 
severe debt, whereas back in 1982 they were able to get those bursaries?  
Why is it that the bursary systems was cut off?  Why is it that you cannot 
be able to do at least a bursary system for the Metis and non-status Indian 
students of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I think our commitment to Indian and 
Metis Affairs is evidenced by the 18.2 per cent increase in the budget 
there this year.  And specifically what we're asking the committee to 
approve in this interim supply is two-twelfths of that, which would amount 
to something close to a million dollars, about 895,500, to be precise, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- The minister never answers questions in that regard.  All he 
gives me is general figures.  I mean we don't know whether all that money 
goes to Property Management, you know, or whether it goes elsewhere.  We 
want to know exactly whether or not you will have a bursary program that's 
tied on with the student loan program that used to be there before, Mr. 
Minister.  That's the question that I asked. 
 
Is any of that extra money going to be there to help those students so that 
their debt that they incur is not so hard that it forces them out?  Is that 
money geared to help these students out, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as it relates to details of assistance 
programs in education, those questions in terms of details might be best 
put to that minister.  I can tell you that, as I recall, in fact as it 
relates to native students, we have I think considered a very 
forward-looking assistance program for them through our student loan 
programs by way of remissions and other things.  But certainly I'd have to 
defer to the minister's estimates for the detailed examination of those 
expenditures. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you also, Mr. Minister, check with me on your 
minister, on the Gabriel Dumont Institute itself, whether or not there has 
been a new contract signed with them and whether or not that contract will 
indeed continue and part of that money will be used, you know, to continue 
the contract with Gabriel Dumont Institute. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The Gabriel Dumont Institute's budget was like all 
other educational institutes, increased by three and a half per cent, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I want to now get into the issue of health, Mr. Minister.  
Of course when the report was tabled, they said that the North was 
third-world medicine, and that was a quote that was given.  The North was 
indeed third-world medicine. 
 
I was in Prince Albert yesterday, Mr. Minister, and I had a chance to meet 
with a lot of the health people, a lot of the health officials, a lot of 



 

 

the community people who are interested in the whole issue of health.  And 
many of them were saying that the government has done really very little in 
the past year to put forth some of the recommendations in regards to 
health, especially in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there was specifically a question asked as to whether or not in the 
budget there would be any amount given to facilities, and particularly the 
La Ronge Hospital where there was a planning phase.  One of the persons got 
up and spoke from La Ronge.  They said, as far as we're concerned, it's 
back to 1982 when there was already a planning phase in regards to this La 
Ronge Hospital.  And the people in there wanting to know whether or not 
there was actual money being put in this year's budget to the actual 
building of the La Ronge Hospital rather than simply a planning phase, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
 DHon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as it relates to those detailed 
kinds of questions, I think we've been through this issue a few times in 
terms of . . . The purpose of this committee is not to get into that kind 
of detail.  I'll have to refer him to a detailed examination of the members 
of those Health estimates in Estimates. 
 
I can, by way of . . . for general information for the committee, relative 
to northern health services, you might be happy to know that there is a 
significant increase of 9.9 per cent in '91 and '92.  I think that speaks 
to our commitment in so far as that is being a priority item.  We're trying 
to put additional moneys in, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Chairperson, I raise these questions because a lot of 
people were concerned.  They knew that this government will put in an extra 
few dollars just before the election, and they've done that back in '85 as 
well.  And then after, you know, the election, then people are forgotten 
about. 
 
We knew that in northern Saskatchewan.  We knew that you cut back on 
community health workers and you cut back on many things.  And then you 
make all kinds of promises just prior to an election and you inject a 
little bit in the budget. 
 
I was just telling that, of course, to the municipal affairs minister 
before where, you know, they cut back on revenue sharing for northern 
Saskatchewan and they come up with a task force report in economic 
development, Mr. Minister, that said, oh, we're going to increase revenue 
sharing. 
 
They're going to increase revenue sharing on one hand and they've cut it 
back by over $200,000 this year.  Now I see maybe that $200,000 that you've 
cut back by municipal services is the one that you added, tabbed on a 
little bit into your health system just prior to the election. 
 
So I understand that one of your persons, I think he might have been a 
deputy minister . . . yesterday I was listening to him in conversation.  
His name was Walter Podiluk.  And he seemed to be saying that the 
government was not really moving on a lot of these things that were 



 

 

required for northern Saskatchewan.  He said that in regards to the 
regional concept of people having greater control of health in northern 
Saskatchewan, people were raising the issue of that.  And Mr. Podiluk was 
saying that we should have regional control in the North.  And the only way 
that the people would be able to get anything from this government is for 
themselves to take political pressure and political power over the councils 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And here was a person who was working in government, now coming to say 
exactly what the people knew in northern Saskatchewan for nine years with 
this PC government, with your government. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, in light of the way your deputy minister had mentioned -- 
Mr. Podiluk -- in regards to the fact that you are not going to do anything 
unless there are political pressure, you know, from northern Saskatchewan, 
could you come up and say, hey, we don't need political pressure from 
northern Saskatchewan.  We're going to work with people from northern 
Saskatchewan in establishing a better health system so that we don't get 
any other reports that say this is Third World medicine up there. 
 
Could you give us an idea in this budget whether or not some of that extra 
money that you have in this budget is going to be there to create the three 
councils for northern Saskatchewan, the way Walter Podiluk would like to 
see it in northern Saskatchewan?  Could the minister give us any 
reassurance on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I think relative to the number of 
issues that he's raised . . . La Ronge Hospital as I said earlier . . . I 
think I'd have to refer him to the appropriate minister in their detailed 
examination of the estimates. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, earlier you 
were referring to CHOICES: Preserving the Saskatchewan Way of Life, and you 
were referring to your budget document that talks about education in the 
province.  And on page 41 of the document, the written information 
indicates that Saskatchewan students will receive $45 million in 
interest-free loans from the province.  But when I examined the actual 
spending estimates document, nowhere in the document do I find the sum of 
45 million, and I'm wondering if you can clarify what appears to be a 
discrepancy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member is looking at 
the wrong vote.  She should look under the . . . I think it's in the 
non-budgetary.  Anyways, it's page 108, Education, vote 141, item 1. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, earlier 
you were talking about school drop-out rates in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and in this document you indicate a number of statistics and 
figures as to the percentage of students completing grade 12 in the 
province since 1966.  Can you tell me where you got these statistics?  What 
is your source? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, the Department of Education. 



 

 

 
Ms. Atkinson: -- And, Mr. Minister, when has the Department of Education 
undertaken the study that indicates that the statistics were accurate 
because up until, I think, a year ago there was no such studies that had 
been undertaken.  When has the department undertaken these studies to 
clarify what in fact is the high school drop-out rate in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't comment in detail in so far as 
the model or how education gathered, or analyse the statistics.  I'd have 
to refer the hon. member to have her put her question perhaps to the 
Minister of Education in an examination of his estimates. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, for the record . . . and I believe you 
were the Minister of Education at the time when I raised the problem of 
high school drop-out rates in the province of Saskatchewan.  And there was 
a major study that was undertaken by Dr. Randhawa at the University of 
Saskatchewan, College of Education, looking at the high school drop-out 
rate in this province. 
 
And using the same methodology that he had used in 1980-81, and conducting 
the study for the years 1985-86, Dr. Randhawa in fact found that the high 
school drop-out rate had indeed risen while the Tories had been in 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, that particular study indicates that we have gone from a 
high school drop-out rate of about 33 per cent up to a high school drop-out 
rate of somewhere in the area of 44 per cent. 
 
And so I'm curious to know whether or not the government is in fact putting 
misleading statistics and information into this document, which I just 
wanted to point out to the members is in fact a bit of plagiarism.  I call 
this the Virginia document.  The state of Virginia uses these kinds of 
documents, Mr. Minister, and I'm just wondering, was this your idea or did 
you lift it from some place else? 
 
But anyway, Mr. Minister, I'm not satisfied with your explanation, and I 
don't think that the information that you have put in this particular 
document governing the high school graduation rate in this province is 
accurate.  The information may be accurate from the '60s-70s, but I'm not 
convinced it's accurate for the 1980s. 
 
So I guess I'm putting on record the fact that I will be asking the 
Minister of Education to clarify where he gets these statistics and the 
methodology that's used, because I don't accept it.  I think the high 
school drop-out rate is much higher in this province that the Government of 
Saskatchewan is letting on. 
 
(1245) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to get back to my comments earlier.  As you know, 
your government has undertaken a major decentralization program in the 
province of Saskatchewan and what you plan on doing is decentralizing jobs 



 

 

in Regina out to rural communities. 
 
Now when you assess the impact of this budget on rural communities, you 
soon discover that in fact there are major job losses as a result of this 
budget.  And there are job losses in rural communities as a result of the 
budget that you have brought down in the area of education.  And we will 
see in excess of 400 jobs lost in rural Saskatchewan as a result of this 
budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I've had the opportunity to phone a number of rural 
school divisions and ask them what is happening in their communities as a 
result of this budget.  And what I discover is that there are three 
teachers laid off in one division, five in another, four in another, and on 
and on it goes, Mr. Minister.  The point being, Mr. Minister, is that this 
budget means job cuts in rural Saskatchewan.  On the one hand you're 
talking about decentralizing jobs out of Regina into rural communities.  On 
the other hand, your budget document is having the very real effect that 
rural jobs are presently being lost. 
 
And that's really nothing new for your government.  We've seen job losses 
when you cut the school-based children's dental program in rural 
Saskatchewan.  We have seen job losses as a result of the privatization of 
the Highways department.  We've seen job losses when it comes to SaskTel 
and SaskPower in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I want you to square with me, square today, how you have decided to cut 
jobs in rural Saskatchewan with your very minimal increase in educational 
spending, Mr. Minister.  Those jobs are already there.  That will have a 
negative impact upon rural communities.  That means that that money will 
not be in that community. 
 
You talk about wealth creation, Mr. Minister.  The fact of the matter is, 
if you have a teacher living in rural Saskatchewan, working in rural 
Saskatchewan, spending her money in rural Saskatchewan, that creates wealth 
in that community.  That community generates wealth, Mr. Minister.  That 
community, as a result of wealth generation, is able to hire people in 
small businesses, keep small businesses going.  And on and on it goes, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Why the cuts in education?  Because it does have a negative impact upon 
rural communities in our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there's a fundamental difference 
here in terms of our approach to this issue.  We've tried to go right back 
to square one.  And the first thing you have to have in rural Saskatchewan 
to have teachers is you got to have students.  And what's happening in 
rural Saskatchewan, the difficulties in the farm economy and the 
depopulation there is well-known to us all.  So the question then is well 
what are we doing about it?  Well a number of things. 
 
Number one: getting some cash into those farm communities, GRIP and NISA, 
the third line of defence; making the economic pie bigger by diversifying 
the economy and hence the opportunity for new jobs for new families with 



 

 

new children to move in, and that's things like community bonds.  As well, 
using Fair Share Saskatchewan to decentralize and to diversify the economic 
base of communities -- more children in the schools, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So those are some of the examples of what we are doing there to make sure 
we have more students, or at least the students that are there staying in 
rural Saskatchewan and being in those schools and hence the teachers being 
required for those students. 
 
You see, the approach of the NDP, Mr. Chairman, is to sort of stick their 
heads in the sand, say that there aren't challenges there, just throw more 
money at the problem, don't try and adjust or anything like that.  And I 
think, Mr. Chairman, you see, that flies once again in the face of our 
government who when we recognize a situation, we put a plan in place and go 
about implementing it. 
 
Now we recognize there's been changes in the make-up of rural Saskatchewan.  
We've put these programs in place as well to stabilize and revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan.  But if we stuck our heads in the sand and said, you know, 
no, there's no changes coming . . . we're not some dinosaur like the NDP 
opposition are. 
 
To that very point, about how we administer our school systems, did you 
know, Mr. Chairman, did you know, Mr. Chairman, that the last time a major 
review was done of how we organize ourselves in the school board divisions, 
you know how long ago since that was done?  It was 47 years ago, Mr. 
Chairman -- 47 years ago since we really looked at how we administer our 
school system. 
 
Now we think a lot of things might have changed in 47 years.  So what are 
we doing?  We've asked a couple of very respected, very respected educators 
and professors to look at the whole question of how we organize ourselves 
into school boards and school districts and how we finance them across 
Saskatchewan.  We're not going to stick our heads in the sand and say, oh 
no, the sky is falling in, the world isn't changing.  We're going to do 
something about it, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to the results of that 
study, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I've had the opportunity to read the 
interim report by Dr. Langlois and Dr. Scharfe.  And the interim report 
paints a pretty sorry picture of your record in education.  This province 
in 1985 had the fifth highest property taxes in the country.  And what is 
the record today, Mr. Minister? -- this province has the second highest 
property taxes in the country.  And why is that? -- because as of 1986 your 
government stopped funding education in this province and there has been a 
transfer of responsibility onto the backs of local property taxpayers. 
 
That document showed that under your leadership, Mr. Minister, under your 
leadership in this province we have seen a major transfer of financial 
responsibility from the province onto the backs of local property 
taxpayers.  And in fact, Mr. Minister, only 48 per cent of the cost of 
education in 1991 is paid for by the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
rest is paid by the local property taxpayers.  That is the reality. 



 

 

 
We have known for 10 years that there is major depopulation occurring in 
this province in rural communities and that there has been a massive 
restructuring in rural Saskatchewan.  But your government chose not to even 
try to deal with the question until a year ago when you struck the 
Langlois-Scharfe commission. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have seen this coming for some time.  And your government, 
because of your lack of vision and because of your lack of a plan when it 
comes to the delivery of education in rural Saskatchewan has done nothing 
until the dying days of your administration. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want you to explain to me, given the fact that there 
were 1,400 students less in rural Saskatchewan as of September 1990, given 
the fact that there were fewer students in rural Saskatchewan, why is it, 
Mr. Minister, that we are seeing up to 366 teachers laid off when in fact 
what should have happened was somewhere in the area of 90.  Why is that?  
And can you confirm that the reason that we have that problem of massive 
teacher cuts in this province is because you're underfunding education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The hon. member's answer, the NDP answer, continues 
to be spend, spend, spend.  Our approach is to try and diversify the 
economy, stabilize and revitalize rural Saskatchewan, stabilize that 
economy so that our entire provincial economy will be healthier, Mr. 
Chairman.  That way we have new jobs, new families, more children in our 
schools, and hopefully we can stop or reverse the decline in our rural 
population, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, it's not working.  It's not working.  We 
continue to have rural depopulation.  We continue to have people leaving 
Saskatchewan.  Your economic strategy for this province hasn't worked.  
We've had 10 deficit budgets in nine years.  We've had record bankruptcies.  
We've had record numbers of people leaving Saskatchewan.  We've had record 
tax increases.  We've had record privatizations.  And now we have the 
record when it comes to the provincial goods and services tax.  It isn't 
working, Mr. Minister.  It's not working. 
 
People are continuing to leave Saskatchewan.  People have no hope.  And 
when you cut spending to education, that really tells us where your 
priorities are.  It tells us where your priorities are. 
 
There were 1,400 fewer students in rural Saskatchewan in September of 1990.  
The grants for this year are based on those numbers, and of course there's 
some adjustments, Mr. Minister.  Rural school boards, had they been 
adequately funded, would have only cut about 90 teachers.  What we're 
witnessing today is somewhere in the area of 400 job losses in rural 
Saskatchewan.  Why, Mr. Minister?  There are at least 300 too many job 
losses.  Why, Mr. Minister? 
 
The reason why is because you and your government have not allowed 
educational spending to keep pace with inflation.  We have massive changes 



 

 

to the unemployment insurance regulations which cost school boards more.  
We have an extension of the provincial goods and services tax which costs 
school boards more.  We have, Mr. Minister, school boards having a more 
difficult time collecting taxes because of the economic crisis.  We have, 
Mr. Minister, school boards dealing with the reality of a 4.5 per cent 
teacher pay increase, Mr. Minister. 
 
Your grants have not kept pace.  You've cut the educational development 
fund by some $7 million.  When you put it all together, Mr. Minister, there 
was a 1.5 per cent increase in spending when it comes to education.  That's 
why there's rural school closures.  That's why there's teacher cuts.  
That's why, Mr. Minister, rural school divisions are forced to close rural 
schools. 
 
It's not acceptable, Mr. Minister; it's a sorry, sorry Tory record.  It's a 
sorry Tory record, Mr. Minister, and I want you to justify that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all she criticizes the 
school boards for the management decisions they've made.  She continues, as 
do all NDP, all socialists, whether they're here or in Ontario, to advocate 
big government is better government.  Never mind whether, you know, it's 
effective or efficient.  If it's more, it's better. 
 
But the classic thing, the word she let slip out, Mr. Chairman, was she 
described the three and a half per cent increase to this year's budget or 
the 2 per cent increase overall, the key three-letter word she used -- and 
it's in there for Hansard, in Hansard; it will be on Monday when we return 
to our places, for everyone to see -- she described the 2.7 per cent 
increase overall in the education budget, the three and a half per cent 
increase in the operating budgets as a cut, as a cut. 
 
So I put to the hon. member: how high does the increase have to be before 
it's not described as a cut?  Does it have to be 10 per cent, 9 per cent, 
20 per cent?  You see, three and a half per cent isn't enough.  But she 
refuses to say to the people how much she would spend, how the NDP plan 
would look. 
 
And the tragedy in all of this as we approach close to the ending time for 
today, Mr. Chairman, the tragedy in all of this, that in 12 interim 
supplies that have come to this House in recent time, only on two occasions 
did it take more than two days for the committee to decide . . . in fact 
only on two times did it take the committee more than one day -- one day of 
the debate -- to decide that we should advance some funding to school 
boards and hospital boards, etc., so they could pay the bills until we get 
the entire estimates examined. 
 
This today now represents the fourth session at dealing with this.  Every 
other year she wanted to know how . . . money are you going to advance the 
school boards and when are you going to get the cheques out there.  She 
hasn't asked that question this year. 
 
I'll tell you what; this is nothing more than politics to hold up this 
legislature, to hold up sending the payments to school boards, the welfare 



 

 

recipients, Mr. Chairman, and I'll tell you why.  And I'll tell you why, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Are they interested in the well-being of the school boards out there and 
helping with their cash flow?  Are they interested in helping the hospitals 
get their money in their pockets to pay the bills?  No, they're not. 
They're not interested in the larger public interest.  All that member is 
doing is trying to advance her own self-interest, her own party's interest, 
for their own partisan reason.  They do not have the public interest at 
heart one iota in this debate.  And that's why they've held up for four 
sessions, Mr. Chairman, when at any other time, a lot of times it only 
takes an hour or two to do the entire Bill, Mr. Chairman. 
 
They are blackmailing the public of Saskatchewan.  They're holding up the 
public of Saskatchewan for their own political motives, Mr. Chairman, and 
it's an absolute tragedy.  And the people of Saskatchewan should know it. 
 
So when the universities phone and the school boards phone and the 
hospitals phone wanting to know where their cheque is, I say phone those 
members over there because they're responsible for this travesty of 
legislative justice, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 
 


