





























































Hansard: June 04, 1991


 

 

June 4/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today, on 
behalf of my colleague the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Regina Rosemont who's unable to be here today, to introduce a group of 12 
students to you.  They're seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These 12 students and their teacher, Ruth Quiring, are from the English as 
a Second Language Centre, at the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) campus here in Regina.  I'm looking forward to 
meeting with them at 2:30 following question period, and I ask all members 
to join me in giving these people a warm welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's indeed a pleasure for 
me this afternoon to introduce to you and to other members of the 
legislature 57 grade 8 students in your gallery from Silverwood School in 
Saskatoon.  They're accompanied today with their teachers, Ron Carlson and 
Orv Neufeldt, along with bus driver, Shelton Lambrosie. 
 
And I'm hopeful the students are going to have some questions a little bit 
later as to the observations that they have here in the Assembly.  And I 
would ask all the members here to wish the students from Silverwood a very 
warm welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Effects of Decentralization 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the acting 
minister in charge of Fair Share Saskatchewan in the absence of the 
minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, today the government announced the 
decentralization of another government department.  Now it's the third 
announcement.  You've done this without warning or consultation, and 
without warning and consultation you've told employees and their families 
that you will disrupt their lives and their homes, and you showed no regard 
for people whatsoever.  You have not provided any evidence that spending up 
to $60 million is a smart thing to do, when your waste and mismanagement 
has already accumulated a deficit of $5.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nine years of waste and mismanagement is no excuse for doing 
even more.  Why then are you making these announcements when you have not 
even prepared a cost/benefit analysis to determine whether it makes any 



 

 

financial sense?  Enough is enough.  Put a stop to this political playing 
with people's lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the process of decentralization that our 
administration has been undertaking, we've been doing now for some several 
years.  In fact one of the very first major ones was Crop Insurance to 
Melville, Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan to Swift Current, 
Pension Plan to Kindersley, and in recent days we've heard two or three or 
four or five more of these relocations.  Why are we doing this, Mr. 
Speaker?  Yes, we recognize there are some one-time costs.  And I think in 
each instance these have been laid out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as well we recognize that the business of government can be very useful 
in helping diversify and broaden the economic base, and in so doing 
stabilize rural and urban communities outside the capital city, Mr. 
Speaker.  That's why we're doing it, to try and help stabilize these 
communities during these difficult economic times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, we too are concerned and are doing our utmost to be sensitive to the 
employees.  That's why on all occasions the employees are met with before 
announcements go out.  Now I will admit there have been occasions, Mr. 
Speaker, where because of apparently leaks . . . and the media are not 
obliged to follow the rules of common decency or courtesy which would allow 
the employees to be the first to know through private meetings.  The story 
is a bigger issue for them and I respect that; I suppose it's their job.  
But in all instances the first we've tried to inform have been the 
employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question, and I ask it to the same 
minister.  Mr. Minister, your policy is nothing less than a shifting of the 
chairs on the economic Titanic in Saskatchewan.  That's what you're doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Last week your House Leader, to an unbelieving press 
corp, said that the new policy for the government was not to embark on any 
project until you have the money in place to pay for them.  It's almost 
unbelievable since . . . you saying this after ten years of deficit 
budgets. 
 
In this budget you've budgeted only $2.2 million this year for 
decentralization, and if every penny of that were to go to pay for the cost 
of moving jobs -- using your numbers, which are not believable -- then 
there would be sufficient money in the budget to move only 140 jobs.  But 
you've already announced 280 jobs will be transferred and apparently there 
are more announcements to come. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, in view of this, why are you misleading people in rural 
communities with phoney announcements just to get past an election?  Isn't 



 

 

that what you're doing, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I would invite the member -- the former 
member from I think it was the Humboldt area -- to take a trip out into 
places like Melville, to places like Swift Current, to places like 
Kindersley, and ask them if this program that we've been embarking on for 
some several years now is somehow phoney. 
 
Ask them if the new jobs and the economic activity in their towns and 
cities aren't important to them.  Ask their chambers of commerce, ask their 
business people, ask their town councils, Mr. Speaker, if those aren't 
valued jobs and valued families and valued new members of their 
communities, Mr. Speaker.  There's nothing phoney about this.  This 
government has been embarking on a plan to help stabilize and revitalize 
our rural and urban communities, Mr. Speaker.  We will continue with it -- 
the community bonds, GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net 
income stabilization account), Fair Share Saskatchewan -- all part of our 
plan. 
 
The hon. member can criticize, criticize, criticize.  I say, where does he 
stand on decentralization?  I say, what are his alternatives to diversify 
and stabilize the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  That's what I say 
to him.  What are the alternatives?  We hear criticism, criticism. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Now we have a situation here where hon. members are just 
going on and on and on.  The Minister of Finance is guilty, and the member 
for Regina North East is also guilty.  He's asking a long question.  Now if 
the two members don't co-operate, I'm simply going to cut each of you off 
arbitrarily.  Now there isn't any reason for long questions and even longer 
answers.  This is not question and answer. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the new question to the minister opposite.  
Mr. Minister, your words sound very hollow in face of the fact that in the 
last several years you have eliminated over 1,000 government jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  Very hollow. 
 
Can you tell us how much of that $2.2 million spent, that is in your 
budget, is spent on your fancy video program for your presentations which 
you've been using, for the three consultants you engaged to help you sell 
this program, and for the extensive advertising campaign which you've been 
undertaking -- another cost to the taxpayers? 
 
And can you tell us how much of that $2.2 million is actually left to move 
the jobs around?  How many jobs -- at your estimate of even the $15,000 
each or the city of Regina's estimates of $30,000 each, which is the 
estimate that was used in Manitoba -- can you afford to transfer this year, 
Mr. Minister? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as far as the costs are concerned, as I 
said earlier the estimates have been put out in each instance.  That's 
point number one. 
 
Point number two -- the video and other advertising that's been done -- I 
would only say this, Mr. Speaker, that all those meetings that were held 
across the province where towns and cities could come and make their case 
and find out how they would go about this process, Mr. Speaker, were well 
attended.  And I think the numbers of communities and cities and urban 
centres that responded indicates that they want to participate in this. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says my words ring hollow.  Well 
let's just read, Mr. Speaker, into the record a very short two sentences 
because these will point out what hollowness really is and what hypocrisy 
really is.  February 6, 1973 in Hansard, that member: "It is interesting to 
note . . ." and I quote: 
 

 It is interesting to note that of the 580 formal complaints (to Commercial 
and Consumer Affairs) 405 of them originated from southern Saskatchewan; 
252 from Regina and immediate area.  This indicates the need for 
decentralization of Government services. 

 
That member, February 1973, Mr. Speaker.  Now he sings a different tune.  
Where does he really stand?  That's the question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the member opposite.  
Mr. Minister, your government is savaging the lives of Saskatchewan 
families for no better reason than to play cheap, partisan politics on 
behalf of the Conservative Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Your decentralization program, Mr. Minister, is nothing 
but cheap politics which does not have any kind of a plan and is just the 
same as the plan that was announced in Manitoba costing $30,000 an employee 
which the Manitoba government cancelled after the election. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I'm asking you: why don't you admit that you don't have 
any kind of a plan, that you have not considered all of the right 
questions, that you've not considered the financial implications of this to 
all of the Saskatchewan taxpayers or the quality of the services that will 
be delivered? And why don't you admit that you're just playing cheap 
politics with the lives of people who work for the province of Saskatchewan 
and the communities you're talking about? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I'm surprised by the 



 

 

new-found criticism of this member and of the opposition.  We know what 
their view was 10 and 15 years ago when he represented a rural riding.  
We've heard what some of their own members have had to say about 
decentralization as it relates to their ridings and the importance to their 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask him: where has this new-found criticism come from?  I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, this was not cheap politics when we moved Crop Insurance to 
Melville, when we moved Ag Credit Corporation to Saskatchewan.  None of 
these questions were raised then.  These were seen as good moves, Mr. 
Speaker, then.  And the same program continued today makes the sense for 
revitalizing and stabilizing and helping broaden the economic base of those 
communities large and small across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say to him, go and ask the communities.  We have a plan; this is part of 
that plan, in conjunction with community bonds and GRIP and NISA.  We're 
here to help stabilize these communities as they go through these difficult 
times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Rural School Closures 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Education.  Mr. Minister, the Provincial 
Network for the Preservation of Rural Schools has met with you and members 
of your government during the past two days to protest your government's 
underfunding of education and your policy initiatives which have led to 
rural school closure and partial school closures. 
 
The average funding increase this year to rural schools has been 
eight-tenths of one per cent.  Obviously that has not kept pace with the 
tax-driven inflation of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, at a time when you are preaching the benefits of a 
decentralized economy, why are you doing all you can to centralize rural 
schools in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I did have a meeting with the 
representatives from the rural schools' network, yesterday as a matter of 
fact.  There was no mention made whatsoever as to underfunding of 
education.  The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is that this year we 
probably have fewer schools closing and fewer schools down-sizing than ever 
before.  Many, many fewer than when that party was in government over 
there. 
 
And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite knows full well that 
it's the school boards that make the decisions with regards to school 
closures and down-sizing.  It is not the Minister of Education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, new question.  It's totally incorrect for 
you to place the blame in the laps of local school boards.  Changes you 
made last year to the funding formula have resulted in a disincentive for 
local boards to operate small schools within a 30 mile . . . kilometre 
radius of each other.  That is a decision, Mr. Minister, of your 
government, not a local decision based on local autonomy. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it's very easy for you people to stand up here in Regina 
and talk about saving rural Saskatchewan.  But when it comes to saving 
rural communities that are there already and rural jobs that are there 
already, you seem to have selective amnesia.  Why should anyone, Mr. 
Minister, believe that you have plans for the future of rural Saskatchewan 
when they can see no evidence whatsoever that you're working to protect 
what's already there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it's very interesting to 
note that the member opposite totally misses the point as to why the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) government has the programs in place that it has 
now.  Whether we're talking about Fair Share Saskatchewan, the community 
development programs or the farm programs, it is to try and stabilize the 
rural economy so that people will remain in the rural areas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the last thing I need is the member over there to be 
talking about education in rural Saskatchewan, because all but one of the 
years that I spent in education was spent in rural Saskatchewan.  I'd ask 
her where she spent her time. 
 
The fact is that these schools are closing, these schools are closing, Mr. 
Speaker, or down-sizing because there is a shortage of students.  In the 
last 10 years, the enrolments have only dropped by 6,000 students -- 6,000 
students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it's understandable, but school boards would have to make some 
changes to cope with that down-sizing of the enrolments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question to this Minister of Education.  He may have 
spent his years teaching in rural Saskatchewan but he certainly has forgot 
where he came from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, the network is recommending that a 
representative, independent committee be formed to examine the question of 
educational . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Excuse me, excuse me.  Order.  I'd like to ask the 
Minister of Finance to please allow the member to put her question. 
 



 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the network is 
recommending that a representative, independent committee be formed to 
examine the question of rural educational needs and to hold a series of 
public hearings in rural Saskatchewan to get the views of rural 
Saskatchewan citizens on the preservation of our rural schools. 
 
Will you today agree, Mr. Minister, to the network's request and work with 
them to establish a committee in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact is as well that parents today 
and ratepayers throughout the province of Saskatchewan do have the right to 
form advisory committees to work with school boards.  We have an excellent 
example of that in the city of Saskatoon right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out as well that it was that government, that 
party over there when they were in power in 1978, that developed the 
present Education Act which states very, very clearly the power of local 
school boards.  And they have the power, Mr. Speaker, to determine where 
students go to school. 
 
I am not going to interfere with the obligations that those school boards 
have nor the legal right that was given to them when that party was in 
power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Supplementary to the Minister of Education.  Mr. Minister, 
you know full well that any funding decisions that are made in the province 
of Saskatchewan are made here in Regina by your government.  You know full 
well that you can talk about local autonomy all you want, but if the locals 
do not have the funding to make autonomous decisions they have to close 
rural schools, Mr. Minister.  Your underfunding is leading to the closure 
of rural schools or partial rural school closure. 
 
Now I ask you again.  The network has come into Regina from all over 
Saskatchewan.  They have met with you, Mr. Minister.  They have asked you 
to form a committee to deal with the whole issue of rural education.  Will 
you or will you not form a committee in order to help preserve rural 
schools, rural communities, and rural jobs, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, this government has very clearly set 
out its plan for rural Saskatchewan.  We haven't heard any plan from that 
side of the House.  We haven't heard any plan from over there at all -- 
what they would do with regard to rural schools. 
 
The fact is that the enrolment in rural Saskatchewan has declined 
substantially in the last 10 years.  That's the reason that schools are 
being closed today or being down-sized, Mr. Speaker.  In fact, when you 
look at the record of all of those school divisions throughout the province 



 

 

of Saskatchewan, the majority of them received an increase in their grants 
this year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, over the last nine years when this party has been in 
power, the grants to school boards throughout this province have increased 
by some 75 per cent.  The total amount of money being spent this year right 
across the piece for education in this province -- over 900 millions of 
dollars.  Mr. Speaker, that's a commitment to education whether it be urban 
or whether it be in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Funding for the Cancer Foundation 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, what we've seen is nine years of wrong PC 
priorities, and our plan is to clean up the PC mess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- My question is directed to the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker, and it has to do with the latest underfunding of the Cancer 
Foundation in Saskatchewan which is going to result in the lay-off of 12 
employees in this very important field, and as well, Mr. Speaker, cut-backs 
to research funding, which is a benefit received by oncologists and health 
care professionals in that area. 
 
Mr. Minister, the result of your underfunding is going to mean a decrease 
in services to cancer patients.  Now how do you justify that sort of 
underfunding, Mr. Minister, at a time when the incidence of cancer is 
increasing in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, we really need to put this into 
perspective.  The hon. member puts this in an altogether erroneous light. 
 
In the budget speech my colleague, the Minister of Finance, announced a 10 
per cent increase -- 10 per cent increase -- a 10 per cent increase in 
funding was announced for the Cancer Foundation, Mr. Speaker.  That 
represented an increase over 1990-91 budgeted funding for the two cancer 
clinics, the foundation administration, and the breast cancer screening 
program which was initiated by our government, one a mobile program in the 
north-central portion of the province, and one free-standing breast cancer 
screening program here in the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those initiatives are initiatives that have gone forward in 
the Cancer Foundation because of the commitment of this government over a 
period of time to the Cancer Foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, operating grants to the Cancer Foundation have increased, Mr. 
Speaker, by 144 per cent since 1981-82.  In that period of time, in that 
decade, Mr. Speaker, 144 per cent increase to the Cancer Foundation.  Mr. 
Speaker, the Cancer Foundation will be able to carry on its programs with 



 

 

the allotted money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister knows full well that it is not a 
10 per cent increase, it's a $1.2 million shortfall to the Cancer 
Foundation if it's to maintain the status quo. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I must point out to the minister here -- 
who says that he doesn't have adequate money to make up this shortfall I'm 
talking about -- that he's prepared to spend millions of dollars for a 
totally political program called Fair Share Saskatchewan at a time when 
cancer incidences are increasing in Saskatchewan.  Nobody believes, Mr. 
Minister, that your government has any commitment to decentralization 
beyond your short-term political gains.  In fact in Health, you're trying 
to centralize hospital and nursing home administration in 10 large regions, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is how can the minister have millions of dollars 
for its disposal to make political announcements such as Fair Share 
Saskatchewan when it doesn't have sufficient money to properly fund cancer 
patients in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, the member for Regina 
Lakeview, makes a significant mistake if she believes that Fair Share 
Saskatchewan and the stabilizing of rural Saskatchewan is not a priority of 
this government and this Premier.  She makes a serious mistake if she wants 
to characterize the Fair Share program as something other than a sincere 
attempt to stabilize rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And to that hon. member and to anyone else, Mr. Speaker, Fair Share 
Saskatchewan, decentralization from this city in the entities that have 
been mentioned, is on and will happen, Mr. Speaker.  That will happen 
because rural communities need stabilizing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- As it relates to the cancer clinics -- the member talks 
about the increasing incidence of cancer -- Mr. Speaker, over the past 10 
years, the operating grant for those clinics . . . a significant increase 
under this government, a significant commitment under this government. 
 
A brand-new clinic that was in dire need of a clinic in that city of 
Saskatoon for a number of years, when they were in government in better 
times. We built that brand-new clinic, Mr. Speaker.  Nine per cent average 
increase over the last 10 years; a 2.5 per cent increase in the incidence 
of cancer -- Mr. Speaker, that's commitment to cancer and that's commitment 
to rural Saskatchewan as well. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, this is the same minister whose government has 
participated in firing over 400 dental workers across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And moving them out of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
They have laid off highway construction workers, they've laid off teachers, 
and most recently nurses in hospitals . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, that's their commitment to jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan -- lay-offs and firing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Every one in the province does not believe that they are 
sincere about their Fair Share program, Mr. Speaker.  But they know that 
cancer workers are real and that they provide a service in this province. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  The question is: when 
will the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena not interrupt?  That's the 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm asking the minister how he can justify 
putting the political needs of his party ahead of the needs of cancer 
patients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the commitment of this government to 
health care and the funding of health care is there for all to see in this 
budget, the budget before that, the budget before that, and over the term 
of this government.  That commitment is there and it's clear for all 
citizens to see, and they know that it's there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member mentions dentists.  The commitment to rural Saskatchewan that we 
have is reflected in the number of dentists' offices that have opened in 
rural communities that were not there before, Mr. Speaker.  Those are 
commitments to rural Saskatchewan and the infrastructure and the services 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
To use an example that the hon. member used in her question, she says that 
we underfunded nurses, Mr. Speaker.  Nothing could be further from the 
truth.  The hon. member, I asked her a number of weeks ago in the House, 
what would she give?  What's her commitment?  What would be the commitment 
of the New Democrats in their flights of rhetoric.  Mr. Speaker, 1,000 new 
nursing positions in the hospitals across Saskatchewan with a similar 
population now compared to what there were 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker -- 



 

 

that's commitment to health care, that's commitment to rural Saskatchewan, 
that's commitment . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the hon. member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd ask for leave to introduce some guests 
that have just come into the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 
legislature a number of people who have come to Regina to speak to various 
members of the legislature over the last couple of days.  These people are 
representatives of the Provincial Network for the Preservation of Rural 
Schools and I'd like to introduce these people who are sitting in the east 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to introduce Christine Torvik who is the chairperson of the 
network and she comes from Macrorie, Saskatchewan.  I'd like to introduce 
Cheryl Robertson who comes from Conquest, Saskatchewan, and she is the 
media relations person for the network.  I'd like to introduce Joan 
Brockman who is the secretary to the network and comes from Middle Lake, 
Saskatchewan.  As well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to all members 
of the House, Lynn Wray who comes from Buchanan, Saskatchewan, and is the 
treasurer.  So I'd ask all members of the legislature to welcome our guests 
and I'd ask our guests to stand. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Medical Profession Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

The Disastrous Effect on the Saskatchewan Economy of the Provincial GST 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  At the conclusion of 
my comments, I am going to move the following motion: 
 



 

 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for imposing 
the provincial GST which will have a disastrous effect on the Saskatchewan 
economy, costing the province much more in lost jobs, business 
bankruptcies, cross-border shopping and reduced tourism than the revenue 
this unfair tax collects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have -- during the month of May and now extending into the 
month of June -- seen a steady parade of Saskatchewan people who say, with 
respect to the PST (provincial sales tax) as it's come to be called, the 
province simply can't afford this.  We simply can't take it.  We have such 
independent groups as workers, business people from the border communities, 
the independent automobile dealers' association, the wide variety of groups 
who have come to us and have said we just can't live with this tax. 
 
What is more important though, Mr. Speaker, than the people who have said, 
we can't live with the tax . . . the business people . . . what is as 
important as the business people who have come forward is the consumers and 
the ordinary Saskatchewan taxpayer.  The ordinary Saskatchewan taxpayer who 
may not be in a retail business on a border community, who may not . . . 
like the automobile dealers selling used cars or the clothing dealers who 
may not be facing imminent bankruptcy, the ordinary Saskatchewan taxpayer 
is saying, no way to more taxes until you clean up the appalling waste and 
mismanagement.  The public are saying that from one end of this province to 
the other.  And this government adamantly refuses to listen. 
 
And I say to members opposite, if you continue to flout public opinion, 
which is what you've been doing, if you continue to flout public opinion, 
you are going to pay a very heavy penalty in terms of the support which you 
might have otherwise enjoyed.  You people may think you can flout public 
opinion on this issue of the tax Bill, and you have.  You have flouted it 
continuously over the last month.  You may think you can flout the public 
opinion, but the public get the last say and the last say is not very far 
off. 
 
Undoubtedly members are going to postpone judgement day as long as they 
can.  But that only puts it a few weeks away.  It's only 12 to 14 weeks 
away.  At the very utmost, you're only going to put it off for 12 to 14 
weeks, and the public are going to have the last say.  And by flouting 
public opinion on the issue of the PST, you're going to reap a very, very 
bitter harvest. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well why worry about it? 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I know members opposite . . . well because the members 
opposite ask me, why worry.  Why are we worrying about it?  Because we're 
not quite as cynical as you people.  We believe that we are here to produce 
good government and that that is our first responsibility, not getting 
elected.  Members opposite believe that their first responsibility and 
their only responsibility is to themselves.  They believe that the only 
reason they're here is to get themselves re-elected. 
 
I say to members opposite, one reason why you're so far back in the polls 
as you are is because you never did have any sense of responsibility to the 



 

 

public.  Your only responsibility is to yourself.  And I have no idea what 
the member opposite wants me to say outside the House.  Nothing I have said 
is in any sense libelous, and certainly I think it's all going to be 
confirmed rather soon.  It's going to be confirmed within a few hours, I 
believe, that you'll find out what a bitter harvest you're reaping on the 
PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a government which has treated, from the very 
beginning, has treated public office as if it were some sort of a private 
hunting preserve.  From the very beginning, had no sense of responsibility.  
Came into office in 1982, paid what Colin Thatcher, the former member from 
Thunder Creek, described as obscene salaries.  And the salaries to the 
political appointments were obscene.  The public have now become somewhat 
jaundiced by it and indeed have come to expect nothing more from this 
government. 
 
But you come into office making patronage an absolute corner-stone of 
public policy, and you've continued in the very same vein.  Why were 
boondoggles, of which many people believe the Rafferty dam may well be the 
largest, why was that proceeded with in the absence of any proper 
engineering or study?  Because it was thought to be in the best interests 
of the Conservative Party. 
 
No one . . . The member's contribution is really going to be missed.  No 
one would have said for a moment that you were acting in your own interest 
if you'd have prepared and filed some studies which suggested the Rafferty 
project was a good one.  To this day that has never been done.  To this day 
that has never been done.  No adequate explanation has ever been offered to 
the public of Saskatchewan for that expenditure. 
 
I can go on and on and on with respect to the fashion in which this 
government has wasted money in big ways and in small.  What has the result 
of your waste and mismanagement been?  The result has been, Mr. Speaker, 
that during the nine years that this government has been in office -- nine 
years and one month that this government has been in office -- inflation 
has gone up.  Inflation has increased by 46 per cent but your revenue has 
increased by 61 per cent.  Your revenue has gone up faster than the rate of 
inflation.  Why do you have almost unmanageable financial problems?  
Because your spending has gone up by 85 per cent. 
 
And when you look to the solution for your deficit, for your runaway 
budgetary problems, you need to look at the expenditure side and not at the 
revenue side, and that's what the public are saying to you.  The public are 
saying to you people: we want you to begin on the expenditure side, and 
when you have cut expenditures back to the point where you're running an 
efficient and reasonable government, then and only then will be the time to 
consider any form of tax increases. 
 
You people absolutely refuse to admit there's a nickel to be saved on the 
expenditure side.  Every time members of this opposition question -- never 
mind accuse -- question the Minister of Finance about waste and 
mismanagement, he gives us a patronizing speech about not being able to 
save any money on paper-clips.  Perhaps you can't save a lot of money by 



 

 

cutting back on paper-clips but you can save a lot of money by cutting back 
on advertising -- tens of millions of dollars. 
 
And as long as the television in this province is inundated by advertising, 
by people who come to us -- Maxwell Smart I guess is the stage name of this 
character -- come to us and attempt to sell us on the merits of our own 
province, as long as you waste money in that fashion, tax increases are 
going to be absolutely unacceptable, and so they should be.  They should be 
because it's unnecessary and because it won't work. 
 
Members opposite are in the same position as the prodigal son or the 
prodigal daughter; someone who is living beyond their means, can't solve 
the problem with a little more income.  We all have a neighbour, a child, a 
relative, perhaps it is ourselves, who always have difficulty meeting our 
bills notwithstanding an income that many people would consider generous.  
Why do these people have trouble?  Because they're overexpending. 
 
Just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I was reading about a bankruptcy of one of the 
senior lawyers in Toronto.  His income in this firm was over $400,000 a 
year and he went bankrupt.  What happened?  It wasn't that he didn't have 
enough income; it was that he was overspending. 
 
You people have been overspending for nine years.  And until you bring that 
process to a halt, no amount of additional revenue is going to solve the 
problem, and that is your fundamental mistake.  It is a mistake in terms of 
policy and it's a political mistake.  It is a mistake because you can't 
solve your fiscal problems by increasing taxes.  It won't work.  Those 
taxes will disappear in the same sink-hole as the other revenue which 
you've had. 
 
And you have enjoyed generous increases in revenue.  Your revenue has 
increased faster than the rate of inflation.  You ought to . . . if you had 
run an efficient government, you could have provided a level of services 
which would have been the pride of this province, and you wouldn't have the 
member from Regina Lakeview and the member from Saskatoon Nutana asking 
pointed questions about cut-backs to schools and cut-backs to hospitals 
because you would have the money to do it. 
 
But you're not running an efficient government; you're running the most 
inefficient government this country has ever seen.  As a result, the 
generous increase in revenue has just been wasted. 
 
And an interesting experience, Mr. Speaker . . . On the weekend I had an 
opportunity, as part of a larger group, to meet with Professor Neil Brooks 
who teaches at the University of Ottawa.  His specialty is public financing 
and in particular taxation and taxation policy of the provinces. 
 
He said to the group -- and I don't think he picked this up in Saskatchewan 
because I don't think he was here long enough -- but he said one of the 
perplexing questions which he had when he began to review Saskatchewan's 
finances is: where has all the money gone?  He said it was apparent from a 
superficial glance that this is a high-taxed province.  The people of this 
province pay higher taxes than most Canadian provinces. 



 

 

 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, from the study done by Global Economics that this 
country pays a higher level of personal taxes than most other western 
developed nations.  People in this province are one of the highest taxed 
provinces in one of the highest taxed countries in the world.  Why can't 
this government make do?  It can't make do because it refuses to admit that 
there's any savings to be made on the expenditure side of government -- and 
there are.  There are an endless number of places that you got to cut back 
and which should be cut back. 
 
And so long as you people continue to think you're going to solve your 
problem by increasing taxes, then you are without hope.  You are without 
hope in terms of your ability to run a government, and you are without hope 
in terms of your ability to win an election.  So long as you persist in 
this course, you are on a course of destruction.  The province is going to 
be destroyed and so will the Conservative Party. 
 
 D(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have simply got to come to their senses.  
This debate has taken a fair while.  It has taken a fair while because we 
believe that sooner or later, common sense and some rationality will seep 
into government ranks.  We can't believe you're going to continue for as 
long as you have.  We didn't believe you could continue as long as you 
have.  We can't believe you'll persist for ever in what is perhaps the 
single most serious mistake you have made during your time in office.  We 
believe you'll come to your senses and this debate is going to continue for 
as long as we can, until you people come to your senses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm reminded that the clock is running.  I therefore move, 
seconded by the member from Athabasca: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for imposing 
the provincial GST which will have a disastrous effect on the Saskatchewan 
economy, costing the province much more in lost jobs, business 
bankruptcies, cross-border shopping, and reduced tourism, than the revenue 
this unfair tax collects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I move that, seconded by the member from Athabasca, and I 
genuinely look forward to the response of members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise in support of 
this motion by my colleague, the member for Regina Centre.  The motion that 
reads: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for imposing 
the provincial GST which will have a disastrous effect on the Saskatchewan 
economy . . . 

 
And I want to now explain through you, Mr. Speaker, and to the House just 
what the effects of this provincial GST (goods and services) is going to 



 

 

have on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the federal GST was put in place by the federal 
government.  And six weeks after that imposition of the Mulroney 
government's federal GST, the provincial government announced its plans to 
impose a 7 per cent provincial GST in Saskatchewan.  The government's plan 
entails harmonizing the new provincial GST with the federal GST. 
 
And some of the items that are going to be harmonized, some of them have 
started on April 1, and some will take place in July 1 or in January 1 of 
next year . . . indicates just how damaging this provincial GST is -- a tax 
that is going to collect $400-and-some million, implementing the provincial 
PST in two stages, extending the 7 per cent provincial sales tax to a wide 
range of previously untaxed goods on April 1, 1991, and extending it to 
services and establishing the businesses input tax credits on January 1, 
1992. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on April 1, 1991, some of the items that have been taxed 
and citizens of this province have been expressing their concerns, actually 
expressing their concerns in the hundreds of thousands as they have signed 
petitions and are still signing petitions and sending them in to members of 
the legislature, asking the government opposite to change their mind and 
get rid of this 7 per cent provincial sales tax -- a tax that is probably 
the biggest tax that's ever been imposed in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of the items that have taken effect on April 1, 1991, that were 
exempt:  children's clothing and shoes, all adults' clothing and shoes 
under $300, books and magazines.  And, Mr. Speaker, you can realize the 
outcry that's coming from this province -- of educators in the province and 
parents who are concerned about this added tax on reading material, 
newspapers, subscriptions, restaurants. 
 
And restaurants and meals, Mr. Speaker.  That is just another tax, as the 
member from Saskatoon University indicated last night, is the tax on food.  
There are many individuals in this province who go out to eat on a fairly 
regular basis.  And when they go out and they have to pay the 14 per cent 
sales tax, they just say, well that's it; I'm just not going to go out any 
more. 
 
And you can talk to restaurant owners all over this province, and they'll 
indicate the same thing, that individuals are just not coming to the 
restaurants.  They're not coming in for meals.  And as a result -- and I'll 
get to that a little later on -- you see the losses in jobs, and you see 
closures contributing to the large numbers of bankruptcies that we have in 
the province.  Snack foods, soft drinks, residential electricity, natural 
gas, and home heating -- now that has all taken place, Mr. Speaker, on 
April 1 of this year. 
 
On January 1, 1992, we have another further increase in the sales tax, and 
I sincerely hope that the government here will, in their good judgement, 
will implement a six-months' hoist and just leave the Bill as it is now 
until the provincial election is over.  Let the citizens of this province 
indicate to you if they are in favour of the tax.  And fine, if you are 



 

 

fortunate enough to get yourself re-elected, then fine, go ahead with the 
harmonization and the addition of the PST.  But let's take a look at a 
six-months' hoist.  Leave the Bill as it is until the election's over. 
 
And I think in all fairness -- surely there's some fairness in some of the 
members over there.  You must be going back to your constituencies the same 
as we are.  Individuals in our constituencies are indicating very clearly 
that this is a bad tax and it has to come to an end.  And you have seen the 
number of petitions that we have tabled in the House, and we intend to 
table a lot more. 
 
So I'd just say to the individuals across there, let's leave the Bill as it 
is, have a six-months' hoist or completely get rid of the tax, have an 
election and let of the citizens of Saskatchewan speak out. 
 
Now on January 1 we are going to have another increase and this is what 
you're going to be paying taxes on.  And you're going to go in and get your 
hair cut, you're going to pay so much for the haircut and 14 per cent 
taxes.  And that hurts everybody.  It hits families who take their children 
in to get a haircut and they get a 14 per cent tax increase on top of the 
haircut.  And I say to the individuals over there: that's just not fair. 
 
You're going to get postage stamps -- 14 cents.  Auto repairs, home 
maintenance repairs, boat rentals, legal services, used vehicles -- they're 
all going to have the 14 per cent sales tax or the 7 per cent provincial 
tax plus a 7 per cent GST. 
 
And you go out and you buy yourself a new vehicle and you pay that sales 
tax.  And then you go out and another member of the family buys another 
used vehicle and they also pay that. 
 
So just take a look at the taxes that are being imposed upon the citizens 
of this province and you can see it's bad, it's bad for small business, 
it's bad for the working families in this province.  And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, it's an unfair tax and it should be stopped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And as I indicated before, when you implement a tax of 
this magnitude it is just a tax that is passed on to the consumers.  If you 
have a company, regardless if it's a carpenter or home repairs or if it's a 
plumber, electrician, if they're going to come to your home or to your 
business and they're going to do a job for you, and when you get the bill 
you're going to find out that you're going to get the 14 per cent -- 7 per 
cent GST, 7 per cent PST -- added on to that service charge. 
 
Plus you're also going to get charged if they have to replace anything, 
they have to buy any materials, they also have to pay that 14 per cent 
because the individual who is doing the repair work has had to pay the 
lumber yard or the outlet where he has purchased a motor that he has to 
replace for you, electrical motor.  So once again the consumer is getting 
dinged with a high tax.  And this has to stop. 
 



 

 

And this is what's happening in Saskatchewan today.  You can see the amount 
of bankruptcies that we have in the province.  Individuals are not looking 
after their businesses properly because they just don't have the money.  
Individuals are not coming in and patronizing them so the business goes 
down. 
 
And we have so many bankruptcies in the province, it's just fantastic.  And 
you go to places and you can see motels, you can go into a motel and you 
can see that they just don't have the staff because they don't have the 
money to operate properly. 
 
And why?  You know, you talk to citizens all over this province who say, we 
just cannot pay more taxes; we don't deserve this.  And they say, why are 
they charging these taxes?  How did we get into this situation? 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, we got into this situation because of the 
government opposite, the Conservative government who started off on 
privatization.  And that's the way they were operating.  And the potash 
industry, they privatized that.  They sold our assets, so our taxes go up.  
They don't mind paying Chuck Childers $740,000 a year and all the perks 
that he can get. 
 
But I just say to this government, it's time that you all stood up in the 
back bench and said, enough is enough.  This is too much on the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Do what we have said over here.  And we have indicated 
quite clearly that if we are elected we will do away with the provincial 
PST.  It no longer will be there.  There will be no implementation of the 
PST on January 1, 1992, if we are elected. 
 
So I say to the members opposite, you have to be getting the same flak that 
we're getting when we go into our constituencies.  And I tell you, I get it 
wherever I go.  If I go to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has expired. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have listened 
fairly attentively to the member from Regina Centre and the member from 
Athabasca and I will be moving an amendment to that motion that is ahead of 
us on the floor of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been, I guess, probably somewhat shocked that . . . It 
is simply amazing, I've got to say, that the NDP have agreed to talk about 
this Bill at all.  Because I guess the more time they spend talking about 
it, the more obvious it is that they don't have much for alternatives.  I 
have not heard anything but sheer negativeness regarding Bill 61, Mr. 
Speaker.  And yet, through that negativeness, I have not heard any 
alternatives. 



 

 

 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that they all seem to agree that the money 
has got to come from somewhere and they all seem to agree that they don't 
like the harmonization.  But, Mr. Speaker, it's fine.  But this is, I 
guess, a free country and they're entitled to their opinions.  But they 
also are elected representatives and they have an obligation, a duty, and a 
responsibility to come clean with the people of Saskatchewan and the 
members of this Assembly and tell us once and for all, what is the NDP 
alternative? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I travel my riding in my constituency, I visited with a 
number of constituents in the last month when we really had gotten into a 
filibuster regarding Bill 61 here in this Assembly.  And I looked at the 
number of names that had been presented in this legislature in regards to 
the petitions that the NDP said, well everybody from all over is really 
upset with this administration. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that my people from my riding 
understand that bills have to be paid.  In my riding, Mr. Speaker, over the 
last nine years now, my riding has come out of a drought, a drought that 
has actually stagnated the constituency.  They weren't able to convince the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government of previous years to build schools 
and hospitals and nursing homes in my riding.  They weren't able to 
convince them to put any major expenditure in the twinning of the 
Yellowhead or other rural road projects or highway projects. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when the NDP opposition have 
talked and want to know . . . and their suggestion to the people of the 
province as they speak in front of the cameras here and from the floor of 
the legislature, indicate that there's been a total waste and mismanagement 
from this government.  Well I'd be the last to say, Mr. Speaker, that maybe 
there has been some dollars that might have been . . . what some people 
could consider wasted or mismanaged or whatever, but I would indicate to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that would be very, very minimal. 
 
I want to indicate to the members opposite though that why Bill 61 is going 
to help this province economically.  Bill 61 will help by helping this 
province become a stronger province in the economic world, in the 
investment world.  It's going to help get all our investments paid for in 
this province, like our hospitals and our nursing homes and our school 
facilities.  It's going to bring and help pay down our debt. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that through these particular collections in 
the near future, it's going to allow this province to move in that 
direction of lower taxation in the province of Saskatchewan.  I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that members of the NDP have been promising 
us one thing.  They're promising the people of this province the fact that 
they're going to repeal Bill 61, and they're going to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- With apologies to the member from Lloydminster, I 
wonder if I might interrupt him to make some introductions. 



 

 

 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I'll be very quick.  Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure at 
this time to rise to introduce a number of independent auto dealers and 
suppliers who are members of a coalition of business people opposed to the 
introduction of the provincial GST.  By their presence, they're 
demonstrating their opposition to this government's harmonization plans and 
will no doubt be interested in the member's comments from Lloydminster as 
to why they really ought to welcome the new tax. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 
The Disastrous Effect on the Saskatchewan Economy of the Provincial GST 
(continued) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, they're promising the 
people of Saskatchewan that they're going to be repealing the provincial 
sales tax to what it will be once the Bill is passed.  And I want to 
indicate to you what that means to the business people in this province.  I 
want to indicate to them that they have no longer any chance of any input 
tax credits back in regards to their business. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, I as a business man know how 
much money I spend one year through another into the next and, you know, 
through having to meet a bunch of obligations.  And this year is just the 
beginning of help for small business across this province. 
 
I want to indicate to you that what this means by the NDP repealing the 
Bill 61 and the PST, that will mean higher income taxes.  And I want to say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that I would sooner have control on my expenditures 
and be able to control my own dollar by saying, well maybe I don't have to 
purchase that particular item where I have to pay a sales tax. 
 
But I'll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, if it's on income tax, what the NDP 
are promising . . . and the member from Regina Centre said this in Regina.  
He said that they would get their new tax source from personal income tax 
and corporate income tax. 
 
So those people that are here today will understand that once you're 
looking at raising the equivalent amount of dollars to pay the bills in the 
province of Saskatchewan, you are now looking at 23 per cent higher income 
tax in this province, or you will be looking at higher gasoline taxes in 
this province, or you will not be able to as well deduct any kinds of those 
expenses in your businesses any longer. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, what it is here today is a point of 
adjustment.  And once those adjustments take place and the people 
understand just exactly how this is going to work, and the more we talk 



 

 

about it, the more the truth will come out.  I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that Bill 61 will particularly be a lot better than me looking at 
the 23 per cent higher income taxes that the member from Regina Centre has 
been offering.  Because there I have no opportunity, I have no opportunity 
to write anything off.  I have to take that 23 per cent before . . . or 
that 23 per cent is taken from me before I even get my cheque, let alone 
the members opposite.  I would tend every member realizes what I'm saying 
is true. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, if we're looking at gasoline -- well 
for every 1 cent tax increase in the province, that will bring $20 million.  
So I can say this, that we're going to be looking at probably in the 
neighbourhood of, what, 10 cents a litre increase in gasoline.  Is that 
what . . . 
 
It's time that the member from Regina Centre came clean with the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  And I indicate to you, it's fine to go out 
there and be opposed to everything, but you'd better have answers for the 
people in this province.  Because I'll tell you, it is not sitting right in 
my riding. 
 
And I'll tell you, we for one if any . . . I come from the border riding of 
Lloydminster.  I represent half of that city.  And I'll tell you, the 
people of that community appreciate  
 Dthe beginning of what they can see is it brings them in closer 
harmonization with Alberta than what they have had to put up with over the 
years. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I'm going to move an amendment.  And 
I'd like to read into the record, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
be substituted therefor: 

 
 recognizing the competitive advantages that Bill 61 will give to the 

Saskatchewan business and the resulting economic growth for the entire 
provincial economy, and recognizing that revenue generated by Bill 61 will 
fund the GRIP and NISA programs which are essential for the survival of 
rural Saskatchewan, condemn the opposition for obstructing passage of this 
Bill without offering viable alternatives to fund GRIP and NISA and 
increase the competitiveness of Saskatchewan business. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to so move, seconded by the member from Yorkton.  
And this here, Mr. Speaker, is probably as about a true an amendment to any 
one of the motions that could be . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order, order.  You've already had your 
opportunity.  And the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake may get his 
opportunity.  I'm not sure if he's on the speaking order or not. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity to 
rise in my place today and take part in this very important debate on the 
harmonization of our PST tax in Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
And today, Mr. Speaker, presents this legislature and the people of 
Saskatchewan a very unique opportunity.  Today not only do we have the 
chance to debate the members opposite on the financial future of 
Saskatchewan, we also have the chance to ask the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale and his members, some very specific questions, and maybe we'll 
get some specific answers.  Maybe today will be the day that the hon. 
member will come clean and tell the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  The hon. member for Saskatoon 
Westmount is on his feet.  Order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to raise a point of order with 
regard to what's going on at this point in the agenda. 
 
The item that's under consideration is motions under rule 16, item 1, to 
which the member has offered an amendment.  The essence of the amendment is 
to strike out the operative part of 1 and substitute therefor item 2 in its 
entirety.  I listened as you read the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and it 
matched with item 2 exactly. 
 
On the point of order, Mr. Speaker, I want to find out from you if it's 
possible for a member to elevate his motion which is on the order paper 
into discussion in this manner.  I want to find that out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1515) 
 
The Speaker: -- Okay, I have listened to the hon. member's point of order, 
and the explanation briefly is as follows.  That the motion as proposed by 
the member for Regina Centre has been moved.  Therefore the effect of that 
was to have the effect of dropping item number 2 under motions under rule 
16.  The motion having been dropped by the moving of the first motion by 
the member for Regina Centre, then the amendment as worded is in order. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As I was saying, maybe 
today will be the day that the hon. opposition will come clean and tell the 
people of Saskatchewan what will they do to replace the expanded sales tax 
if they appeal it.  Where will they get the revenue to pay the $180 million 
for GRIP and NISA?  Where will they get the 100 million required to reduce 
the deficit this year?  Where will he get the $1 billion required to pay 
for his promised revisions to the Social Services critic? 
 
It is time the member opposite put his money where his mouth is and 
answered these questions.  We don't want to see him duck and dodge and dip 
and weave around saying all that is needed is the elimination of government 
waste and mismanagement.  That is a cowardly way to approach this debate 
and it's time for real answers.  The people of the province are tired of 
hearing that eliminating waste and mismanagement is the answer to all of 
our troubles. 
 
And I have yet to hear their interpretation of what waste and mismanagement 
is.  Is it providing the farmers of our province with assistance, with 
money to help them through some rough times?  Is that waste and 



 

 

mismanagement?  Is it providing people the opportunity to repair their 
homes with a $1,500 grant?  Is that waste and mismanagement?  Is it 
mismanagement to reduce the tax that was escalating by huge percentage 
points before we were elected, to give the people of this province a break 
in taxation?  Is that waste and mismanagement? 
 
The only thing that I've heard is GigaText.  But we look at Nabu.  What 
happened to Nabu when that outfit was in the driver's seat, putting money 
into Toronto for a computer or some sort of -- what was it anyway? -- 
translation thing.  And $8 million lost, buying shares on the stock 
exchange, which didn't create any jobs in Saskatchewan.  What happened to 
it?  It was lost -- $8 million.  We don't hear about that.  But we hear of 
the $5 million that was spent on GigaText. 
 
And I'll bet you any money that somewhere in the next few years that that 
technology will become a reality in this province.  It's no different than 
the company I worked for.  We did total type work.  We'd spend three, four, 
five years testing equipment, trying to get it ready for the market.  And 
it cost us a lot of money to do that.  But we did it.  And that's the only 
way you can proceed in this world of ours. 
 
The people of the province are tired of hearing about waste and 
mismanagement.  I'm getting it at home every weekend when I go home.  They 
realize that even by taking the measures the member from Riversdale 
mentioned last week, which would save about $76 million, comes nowhere near 
the revenue needed to provide agricultural protection for this year, never 
mind paying for the rest of their promises.  They are especially tired of 
hearing it from the member opposite, and an opposition that has continually 
changed their position depending on which way the wind is blowing. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, that proposition has a chance to tell the people how 
they will generate alternate sources of revenue for this province.  They 
have had other opportunities as well.  The debate that was held last 
Wednesday night offered the member from Riversdale a glorious opportunity 
to give some solid answers. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he let that chance slip through his fingers by giving 
weak and ideological double-talk.  The people of Saskatchewan have had 
enough, Mr. Speaker.  They want answers. 
 
The government has made its position very clear from day one, Mr. Speaker.  
We were asked what this tax was needed for.  We have stated that the 
expanded E&H (education and health) tax is the most responsible way to 
distribute the cost of agricultural assistance, agricultural assistance 
that would generate $1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker.  Can you imagine what $1.3 
billion in the pockets of the farmers of Saskatchewan would do for our 
economy.  They spend it in Yorkton and I'm sure they'll spend it in every 
other community in the province.  We were asked to do what we could for 
agriculture, but don't run up the deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tax allows us to provide agricultural assistance at the 
same time as eliminating the deficit in three years.  We were asked what 
this tax would mean to businesses across the province.  We indicated the 



 

 

tax will generate $260 million in tax savings and be much easier for 
business in the province to administrate, Mr. Speaker.  We were asked how 
low income families would be affected.  We had stated that we had 
implemented a family tax credit system to protect low income families. 
 
We run a small business -- or I used to; my son has taken it over -- a 
music store in Yorkton.  This tax input credit is going to put thousands of 
dollars back into his pocket which has always gone for education tax.  But 
the members opposite, as well as . . . (inaudible) . . . from '82 on.  Any 
item that we used in our store that we paid education tax on will be 
rebated now.  And for a small business, that's a lot of hay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about the low income families?  A $200 tax credit a year plus the tax 
credit that will come from the federal GST, upwards to $500 per child.  The 
family of four, $2,000 back in their pockets will cover a heck of a lot of 
education tax for meals and books and some clothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ask the member from Riversdale how he would raise the revenue that's needed 
to pay for GRIP and NISA.  How would members opposite raise the revenue 
needed for the numerous election promises?  Ask them how they will 
eliminate the deficit.  What was that answer?  Four years, 15 years, 20 
years, or maybe they didn't mention anything about deficit reduction at 
all. 
 
Every time the opposition gets pinned down to answer something, they simply 
say, I can't recall saying that, or I'll duck the question today.  That is 
not good enough.  We have finally established that they will get rid of the 
tax after months of their flip-flopping around the province on that issue. 
 
Now that the member from Riversdale has committed himself to that, how will 
he pay for this province's needs?  Was he being forthright with the people 
when he said he would cut government advertising by 80 per cent?  Will he 
stand up in this House today and tell the printers of small community 
papers that if the NDP are elected, the government will no longer be doing 
business with them? 
 
It's amazing about the number of letters that I'm starting to get in my 
office, and I'm sure my colleagues are, as well as the member from 
Riversdale, about the impact of the elimination of that tax and advertising 
will be for them. 
 
Will he stand up in this place and say that increases in income tax will be 
inevitable if the NDP win power?  Will he acknowledge that the revenue lost 
from the elimination of the E&H tax will have to be made up through some 
other particular mechanism?  Will he stand up today and say that balancing 
the budget and deficit reduction will be impossible without the revenue 
generated by the E&H tax?  Or will he stand up in this place today and 
retract all of the election promises he has made along with his colleagues 
because they simply will not have the revenue to supply those promises? 
 
He has a chance today to answer to all these questions, Mr. Speaker.  And 
quite frankly the people of this province deserve and expect nothing less. 
 



 

 

I can understand if the members opposite are feeling a bit nervous about 
their position on the tax.  You see, Mr. Speaker, they are comfortable with 
the political advantages to opposing any tax instituted by government.  
What they are not comfortable with is the fact that the people of the 
province are saying that it isn't good enough just to oppose something.  
You have to be able to alternate credible . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think it was . . . 
I'm going to be speaking against the amendment and in favour of the motion 
that's before us today, of course. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the members opposite speaking about 
this tax, I was remembering that it was about four years ago in the 
Legislative Assembly that I made the comment that I felt like I was Alice 
in Wonderland attending the Mad Hatter's tea party. 
 
And since that time so long ago, I felt that way many times in this 
legislature, but not nearly as strongly as I have in the last weeks as the 
government has been defending the Bill 61 to bring in the provincial sales 
tax.  The arguments that they have been using have made no sense 
whatsoever.  And this tax makes no sense whatsoever and it is a very 
unpopular one in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This government opposite for nine years has collected every year $4.5 
billion in taxpayers' money, without the expansion of the provincial sales 
tax.  Those are the hard-earned dollars of the people of this province.  
And they have not been able to manage a province of under a million people 
with $4.5 billion in revenue. 
 
The waste and mismanagement of the government opposite has been scandalous 
over the years, and we have many, many examples of the way in which the 
taxpayers' money has been wasted.  The reality is that they've collected a 
lot of money in this province, and it has been spent on scams and on 
megaprojects and on patronage in ways that have been just disgraceful. 
 
The member from Yorkton mentioned the money that was spent on the home 
improvement program.  Only last November we found out in Public Accounts 
that that particular program has $10 million in loan defaults out of the 
treasury of Saskatchewan -- another example of the waste and mismanagement. 
 
And our side in opposition has been very clear on what we would do to 
address this issue.  We have said it over and over again, but the Mad 
Hatters opposite are not understanding what we are saying.  But the people 
of Saskatchewan do understand. 
 
What we will have to have first and foremost in this province is an 
independent auditor to look at the books, to open the books and see what's 
happened to the money that has been wasted, collected from the taxpayers of 
this province. 



 

 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in opposing this tax, I stood in front of Midtown Plaza 
in Saskatoon, collecting signatures on petitions.  And people said to me 
often, what good are petitions anyway?  Or they would say things like, 
signing a petition isn't going to make any difference.  Or things like, the 
government isn't really going to listen to us.  And they were very cynical 
and very full of despair. 
 
But we brought those petitions into the legislature, and when the 
government opposite was forcing closure on us in debating this sales tax, 
we used those petitions as the voice of the people to speak in this 
legislature for 10 days in opposition to this sales tax. 
 
When the government opposite brings in an amendment that says that they 
want this Assembly to recognize the competitive advantages that Bill 61 
will give the Saskatchewan business, you really wonder where in the world 
they are.  Even their own ideology of competitiveness doesn't stand up when 
you sock the consumers of Saskatchewan with such a high tax. 
 
It makes no economic sense whatsoever to inflict this tax on the people of 
Saskatchewan.  Because even if the businesses get back a tax credit, the 
businesses get no consumers, no customers. And that's the issue.  The issue 
is the failure of people to have the disposable income to pay this tax.  
And the chaos that has been created particularly along the border 
communities, not just with the United States but with Alberta, has hurt the 
border communities tremendously and many of them are complaining. 
 
(1530) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, earlier this afternoon we heard from the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster speaking to his amendment with great pride. And I would 
like to take this opportunity to read into the record an article from the 
Star-Phoenix of Tuesday, May 28.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am now quoting 
from the Star-Phoenix, that: 
 

 Michael Hopfner, PC MLA for Cut-Knife-Lloydminster, said he's aware of the 
lobbying out of Maidstone, but he's not recommending any change to 
government policy. 

 
 Business people must learn the PST and its input tax credits will 

ultimately be good for business and the economy, he said. 
 
 But Maidstone business doesn't buy that at all. 
 
 "That's bull and they know it," retorted Kay Key, manager of the Maidstone 

Co-op. 
 

End quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That's what they think in Maidstone, 
Saskatchewan, one of the many communities in the province that has been 
very hurt by this increase in the sales tax -- a 14 per cent tax on retail 
goods for sale on the borders of Alberta and with the United States. 
 
Now what this government opposite has done is to call in the federal 



 

 

government who now is promising to increase the police surveillance and the 
custom surveillances on the borders with the United States to collect the 
tax.  And that's not going to work because people are so fed up with the 
government's waste and mismanagement and with the fact that they're taxing 
the province, that they are going to find all sorts of ways to bypass this 
tax. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm reminded of an article in the Maclean's magazine 
where someone was quoted as saying, it's not the Canadian way to yell and 
scream in the street, but people have reached the breaking point.  
Consumers are using cross-border shopping as their tax revolt.  They're 
voting with their money and their feet. 
 
And that is so true, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan.  And it is hurting our 
businesses so very badly.  We have described it on this side of the House 
as a body-blow to the businesses of Saskatchewan.  And if the government 
members opposite can't recognize that reality, they are very much out of 
touch with what is happening in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problem with the tax, with the cross-border 
shopping, has been debated at some length in the House here.  It means that 
people are going over the border for the items that are now taxed with this 
new tax, and they are learning a way to bypass the government.  They are 
having to pay in Saskatchewan much more for children's clothing, for 
restaurant meals.  And how in the world a tax like this helps 
competitiveness when we have so many restaurants, for example, in 
competition with each other already and you sock them with a tax like this, 
and most of them are very fearful that they are going to have to go under 
into bankruptcy and add to the great number of bankruptcies that the 
province has already experienced. 
 
That is not competitive business.  That is total destruction of the 
economy.  And it's interesting to watch when you bring in a sales tax like 
this how the businesses and the people of the province fall like dominoes 
in front of this major change. 
 
It's putting people out of work.  Workers are losing their jobs because 
businesses have to close.  That's not business competitiveness when people 
lose their jobs.  Although the government opposite seems to think that this 
tax is going to create jobs, it's doing quite the opposite. 
 
It's also hurting the small businesses and it's hurting the consumers, 
particularly the consumers on lower incomes.  And over the last nine years 
under the Conservative government in this province, people's incomes have 
dropped dramatically.  Costs have gone up.  Taxes have gone up.  Services 
have gone up in price and people's wages have not increased to meet that 
demand. 
 
People are hurting.  And now in the dying days of this government we have 
even more chaos than we've ever had before.  We have this sales tax bashing 
our communities.  In Saskatoon, where people don't have the disposal income 
to support their business . . . 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Member's time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to rise in my seat and say a 
few words on this subject, Mr. Speaker.  It's a little unusual because I 
was a little surprised that the members would want to debate this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker.  But anyway, Mr. Speaker, it's amazing that they agreed to talk 
about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they all agree that the revenue is needed.  And they all seem 
to agree that the money has to come from somewhere and they also seem to 
agree, Mr. Speaker, that they don't like harmonization except when you look 
at some of the statements made by the member that passed the . . . made the 
motion.  He says this harmonization is not necessarily bad.  So I guess, 
Mr. Speaker, day by day they change their mind. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's fine.  It's a free country and they are entitled 
to their opinions.  But they are also entitled . . . and they're also 
elected representatives and they have an obligation, Mr. Speaker, and 
indeed a duty and a responsibility to come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan and the members of the Assembly and tell us once and for all: 
what is their alternative?  Where are you going to get the money?  I would 
also ask the member from Saskatoon University where he's going to get the 
billion dollars he wants to spend. 
 
We've made promises, Mr. Speaker, and they've made promises.  They've made 
promises to people all across Saskatchewan and how do you think they're 
going to pay for it?  How do you think, Mr. Speaker?  Do you know, Mr. 
Speaker, when they look at it, the NDP are a pretty sorry lot -- a pretty 
misguided group.  They know how to spend.  They've got that side of the 
equation down to a science, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My colleague, the member from Lloydminster, has kept us in touch with some 
of the outrageous promises made by the NDP, and so has my colleague from 
Rosthern, Mr. Speaker.  Between the two of them, they've kept track of over 
13 billion  
_- that's with a big B billion -- over 13 billion worth of promises made by 
those people over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it's clear that they've figured out how to spend, but they don't know 
how to generate money.  Mr. Speaker, it's one thing to give away wealth; 
it's another thing to create it.  It's a whole different story; it's a 
whole new ball game, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say something on a personal level.  Had this 
harmonization program been in effect in the last few years that I was in 
business, it would have saved my business about $30,000.  Mr. Speaker, when 
I was in business I paid thirteen and a half per cent manufacturers tax and 



 

 

I paid 5 per cent E&H tax.  That's about 18 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  And the 
last two years I was in business I spent over $200,000 in capital 
investment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you take 18 times 2 is around 36,000.  So I just give you 
the benefit of the doubt that I would have saved in my business.  And I was 
a small-business man, Mr. Speaker. And any business man that looks at this 
harmonization program will tell you it's the right thing to do.  It's the 
right thing to do because it's right for the times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately for the NDP there's no way on God's green earth that any 
government anywhere could ever spend enough on advertising to pay for the 
promises that they've made. 
 
I have a letter on my desk, Mr. Speaker, from the local editor of the paper 
in my town.  And he crunched out some figures and showed me, Mr. Speaker, 
that if the NDP become government and knock off 80 per cent of the 
advertising, it cost him one paper and 14 jobs -- 14 people. 
 
Now that's fine, Mr. Speaker.  They like that, I guess.  They'd like those 
14 people to go on welfare.  Then they would have control of their lives.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, we don't think like that.  We want them to be out there.  
We want them making lots of money.  We don't want them even on minimum 
wage.  We want them making lots of money, Mr. Speaker.  That's the way you 
create wealth. 
 
The member from Riversdale figures that by cutting government advertising 
by 80 per cent he's going to make  
 Dup the shortfall needed, Mr. Speaker.  How ridiculous can you get.  Here 
he goes with his socialistic arithmetic.  He took a run at me, Mr. Speaker, 
in Yorkton today.  He said he could save up to a hundred million dollars 
just cutting out legislative secretaries' salaries.  Mr. Speaker, how 
ridiculous.  How ridiculous can you get, Mr. Speaker! 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, I've done a little survey on their promises and made 
a couple of budgets for them.  I think my next project will be to find out 
how many hypocrites, how many types of hypocrites there are.  Yes, you have 
your standard, everyday hypocrite.  Then you have your standard, everyday, 
pious hypocrite, Mr. Speaker.  Then you have your standard, everyday, 
pious, sanctimonious hypocrite, Mr. Speaker.  And I have come to the 
conclusion you find all of them over there, Mr. Speaker.  And it's a little 
job that I think I'll have to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- The member from Riversdale figures that by cutting 
government printing bills by 66 per cent, he's going to come up with the 
cash, Mr. Speaker.  He says that by doing away with these so-called sources 
of waste and mismanagement he can find about another hundred million 
dollars -- another hundred million dollars. 
 
There's his arithmetic again.  Poppycock, Mr. Speaker.  That isn't 
possible.  He never took and crunched the figures.  Our total of 



 

 

advertising budget is around 37 million and he's going to save 79 million.  
Again he's got his socialistic typewriter or adding machine over there, Mr. 
Speaker, and it don't make sense. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- So where did the money go? 
 
Mr. Britton: -- That's right, where did the money go?  Okay, there's the 
question.  Well I could tell you where the money went.  I could tell you in 
one project, Mr. Speaker, $365 million went to protect people against high 
interest rates, high mortgage rates. 
 
Waste and mismanagement.  Now, Mr. Speaker, how many times, how many times 
are you going to spend that dollar?  Every time they get up on their feet, 
Mr. Speaker, they're going to pay for it with waste and mismanagement.  Mr. 
Speaker, I'll have some words to say a little later. 
 
And I'll tell you, I have come up with a program that shows that they are 
going to save $3 billion on waste and mismanagement.  Our total spending 
budget is four and a half billion.  That leaves 1.5 million to run the rest 
of the government.  Health care takes $1.3 billion.  Mr. Speaker, it's 
ludicrous, totally ludicrous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me run a few figures by you.  They are going to give up 
$180 million and they're going to spend 125 million.  That's $305 million.  
And he tells us he's going to get it from waste and mismanagement.  And all 
he can figure out is $79 million, Mr. Speaker.  I wonder who does their 
arithmetic over there, or does anybody do it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to share with you and the members of the Assembly 
some excerpts from a letter written to the Premier from the Saskatchewan 
Graphic Arts Industries Association.  These are the people that they're 
going to cut.  The association wrote in response to comments made by the 
Leader of the Opposition on May 21, 1991, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 A 66 per cent cut in government printing would save another $24.6 million 
this year. 

 
That was the remark made by the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Riversdale.  That irresponsible comment was deeply troubling to the 
industry for the following reason, and I would like to quote from their 
letter they sent to the Premier: 
 

 A 66% cut in government printing would cut current spending at around 
$37,500,000.  The entire printing budget for 1990-91 according to 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, $13.2 million. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you, who in the world would believe such total garbage?  
Mr. Speaker, I ask again, how many hypocrites do we have?  How many . . .  
we have the sanctimonious; we have the pious, and we have your stand-up, 
ordinary, everyday hypocrite, and there's probably some more.  And they've 
got them all over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What a joke.  What a joke.  What typical NDP jokes.  And, Mr. Speaker, that 



 

 

industry is not alone in its condemnation of the NDP's suggestions.  But 
the whole conference is a joke, Mr. Speaker.  An NDP strategist was 
reported . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I was very interested to hear that the hon. 
member from Wilkie is going to do a study.  I was very interested in 
hearing, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member from Wilkie was going to do a 
study as to what kinds of hypocrites there are in this world.  I could 
think in this House of no one that is better qualified to undertake that 
kind of a study. 
 
Particularly when I hear him start . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member from Wilkie had his opportunity 
to speak.  I'd ask him to let the member for Saskatoon Fairview speak. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Particularly when I hear his explanation, Mr. Speaker, 
about the deficit of $5.2 billion and how it was that over the course of 
nine years the government opposite managed to accumulate that kind of a 
deficit. 
 
I have in my mail today a document that comes from Burns Fry, the economics 
department that focuses on Canada's debt burden and makes the point that 
that debt burden is sapping the economy.  And in that analysis, on page 6, 
is a chart showing government debt, combined government debt per employed 
person.  Now this is the combined debt of the residents of this province 
and other provinces in the country on account of the federal and the 
provincial debt. 
 
And this analysis shows that Saskatchewan's debt per employed person is the 
second highest in Canada and the provincial share of that is higher per 
employed person than in any other province in Canada. 
 
Now the expert on hypocrites, when he next takes his speech, should pay 
some attention to that particular statistic and explain to this House and 
this province how it is that in the space of nine short years we have 
managed to attain the distinction of having the highest provincial debt per 
employed person of any jurisdiction in the country, including Newfoundland, 
including Prince Edward Island, including New Brunswick and all the other 
provinces.  Now how can that be? 
 
He expresses amazement, Mr. Speaker, that we would discuss the provincial 
sales tax.  And I want to say for the benefit of that member and all of the 
members opposite that we intend to continue discussing that tax each and 
every day from now until election day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- From now until election day.  A lot of things about the 



 

 

government opposite has angered and enraged the people of this province.  
But none more so . . . but none more so than the imposition of the PST and 
the harmonization of the PST with the GST.  That has fuelled the fires of 
opposition to this government more than any other issue that has come along 
in the last nine years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only do we intend to debate it today but we intend to debate it 
each and every day from now until election day.  And I'd like our friends 
to understand that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- In the few minutes that I have available, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to pick up on a theme mentioned by my colleague from Saskatoon 
Centre concerning job losses or the job situation that will follow from the 
imposition of the PST. 
 
Now it is the claim of the Minister of Finance in the budget that in some 
magical, unexplained way, in some magical way the imposition of a new tax 
of $440 million on the people of this province is somehow going to 
magically create 5,000 new jobs.  Now I know that the Minister of Finance 
is anxious to get into this debate, Mr. Speaker, but I'd like a few moments 
to try and put it to him on this issue. 
 
We've gone over those numbers very carefully.  It will be noted first of 
all that neither in the budget nor in any subsequent occasion has the 
minister given us the back-up, the analysis, the evidence, the rationale 
that proves that it is possible for that tax to result in the creation of 
5,000 new jobs. 
 
Now the minister is handing across his little publication that's supposed 
to prove anything at all.  Mr. Speaker, we've been through that analysis 
and it adds absolutely nothing to the minister's meaningless speeches in 
this House on that point. 
 
Somehow when you take $440 million out of the economy, Mr. Speaker, so that 
people no longer have that money to spend on goods and services, but must 
spend that money on a new tax, that is supposed to stimulate the economy, 
to create new jobs.  Give us a break, Mr. Speaker.  Give us a break.  
Anyone with a smattering of knowledge in economics knows that it just can't 
possibly work that way, and it won't. 
 
Let me put it this way, Mr. Speaker.  If you were a big input user, a big 
manufacturer, and you in your manufacturing process were using a lot of 
goods on which you had to pay tax, then some of those taxes could be passed 
on to the consumer.  But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that for 
the most part, the employers and the businesses in this economy are not big 
payers of that tax.  They don't have a lot of input taxes to pass on to the 
consumer. 
 
The restaurant owners are a case in point.  They don't pay a lot of tax on 
the material that they bring into their place, that they can recover from 
their consumers.  For them far more important is the fact that their 



 

 

customers have to pay an additional 7 per cent for every meal they buy.  
And that's killing their business, Mr. Speaker.  That's killing their 
business.  And it's absolutely no consolation for them to have the Minister 
of Finance stand up and say that tax is good for you, because they know 
it's not.  They know it's not. 
 
Similarly, if you're in the book selling business, Mr. Speaker, if you're 
in the book selling business, you don't have a lot of taxes that you can 
pass through.  Of far more importance to you is the fact that your 
customers have to pay an additional 7 per cent for every book that they buy 
across the counter in addition to the 7 per cent GST that people have to 
pay on every book that is sold across the counter for a grand total of 14 
per cent -- a 14 per cent increase in the price of books. 
 
Tell the bookkeepers how this tax is such a . . . or the booksellers how 
this tax is such a wonderful employment creator in their particular 
business, and they'll tell you that's a bunch of bunkum.  They'll tell you 
that this new tax has put their businesses in grave jeopardy and indeed 
will result in many of them going down the tubes.  Now that's no progress, 
Mr. Speaker.  That does harm.  That doesn't create jobs; that costs jobs. 
 
And if you look through the other businesses . . . and the minister is 
anxious to talk about the other businesses.  Let's talk about finance and 
insurance and real estate.  Let's talk about the whole of the service 
industry: the hotels; let's talk about transportation, the transportation 
area; the construction area; communications, and utilities.  All this 
bundle of industries that I've mentioned, Mr. Speaker, account for 
something like 73 per cent of employment in this province, approximately 
329,000 jobs in those industries.  For them the input tax credit is next to 
meaningless.  For them of far greater importance is that their customers 
now have to shell out another 7 cents on every dollar when this tax is 
fully implemented. 
 
For them that is no incentive or no stimulus to increase employment, and it 
won't be so.  And the minister knows it, and all the members opposite know 
it. 
 
I have already conceded that some businesses that use a lot of material in 
their processes that they have to pay tax on will be able to pass that tax 
on.  And you can make some arguments that that will put those businesses in 
a better position, Mr. Speaker.  But there's absolutely no guarantee, 
there's absolutely no basis for believing, that those businesses will be 
able to create jobs in this economy as a result of that saving.  It may 
result in some of them losing less money than they're losing now or making 
a little money rather than losing some. 
 
But to put this tax forward as a great stimulus to the economy, as a great 
job creator, is the worst kind of hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, and I want the 
member of Wilkie to remember that when he undertakes the study that he was 
talking about -- the worst kind of hypocrisy.  To imagine that sucking 
$440,000 out of the economy is going to be any kind of stimulation or any . 
. . 
 



 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to rise to 
speak to this matter.  Mr. Speaker, one of the great fallacies of this 
Progressive Conservative government has been foisting on the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . that somehow this Bill 61 of theirs, that this sales tax 
is there to pay for GRIP and NISA, the farm programs.  Well it's not true. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Seventy-five minutes has elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  By leave I would move 
now that we go directly to government business, precisely Bill 61. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- The member's asked for leave.  Is leave granted? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like clarification.  The 
Government Acting House Leader indicated he was going to government 
business.  I would like clarification that we're going actually to Bill 61 
and only Bill 61. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, to repeat my words, I by leave 
would ask that we go directly to government House business, precisely Bill 
61. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's asked for leave.  Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act (No. 2) be now read a second time and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Van Mulligen. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and continue my remarks with respect to a 
very important piece of legislation, Bill 61, which is in effect the 
legislation that authorizes the collection of provincial sales tax on basic 
necessities of life -- things like restaurant meals, home heating fuel, 
books, magazines, and clothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side of the House are 
strongly opposed to this new provincial sales tax.  And we are also 



 

 

strongly opposed, Mr. Speaker, to the proposal of the government, effective 
January 1, 1992, to implement a major tax increase on all services in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, are committed to ensuring 
that after a provincial election, if an NDP government is elected, this 
unfair provincial GST will be repealed as one of the first legislative acts 
of a newly elected NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I was saying yesterday that we believe it 
is very unfair that the government would choose to implement a tax on basic 
necessities like food, clothing, and shelter; and that we feel it's 
inappropriate that the government would choose to implement, in effect, a 
tax on knowledge and information through their new 7 per cent tax on all 
reading materials. 
 
And we believe also, Mr. Speaker, that this tax is unfair because it takes 
no account of the ability of the individuals being taxed to pay.  It is a 
regressive tax that is not based on people's income and their ability to 
pay, but is rather an across the board consumption tax that taxes a senior 
citizen with an income of $8,000 in the same way as a millionaire is taxed 
if they're buying an identical item.  And we believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
this kind of regressive taxation is not called for in this province and 
simply leads to an even more unfair tax system than the one we already 
have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we oppose this tax increase and this provincial GST because it 
represents a huge increase in the tax burden that individual consumers in 
this province are going to be faced with.  A typical Saskatchewan family, 
Mr. Speaker, is going to face an additional tax burden of at least $740 a 
year as a result of the provincial GST.  In effect, Mr. Speaker, what we're 
seeing here is a doubling, more than a doubling, of the provincial sales 
tax. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, from a government that has no mandate to govern any 
more.  It, in effect, has lost its right to govern.  We are more that four 
and a half years now into  
 Dits term.  This is a government that is afraid of going to the people of 
Saskatchewan, afraid of going to the polls in a general election, Mr. 
Speaker, and governs without a moral mandate to govern and has the gall to 
introduce, four and a half years in to its term, such a massive tax 
increase -- the largest tax increase in Saskatchewan history. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated, this tax is going to hit middle income 
families particularly hard -- at least $740 a family.  An average, middle 
income family are going to face an extra tax burden of $740 as a result of 
this tax. 
 
This is also a tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is going to hurt low income 



 

 

persons, particularly single persons and married couples without children.  
The government has chosen to put into effect a tax credit for families with 
children that will in effect give them approximately $200 a year to attempt 
to offset the impact of the provincial GST.  But there is no tax credit in 
place for individuals and for married couples who are living below the 
poverty line.  And as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this kind of a broadly 
based consumption tax will simply take money out of their pockets in an 
unprecedented way.  This represents a huge tax increase for these people. 
 
And with respect to Bill 61, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that at this point deals 
primarily with a tax on goods -- the extended tax on goods, a tax on the 
necessities of life -- this tax is going to hit these low income single 
individuals and married couples particularly hard because in effect they 
spend most of their money on basic necessities.  So a tax on home-heating 
fuel or a tax on clothing, an extra consumption tax on those kinds of 
items, particularly hurts those individuals living below the poverty line. 
 
Now one of the questions the government has to account for, I believe, sir, 
is the question of why we see no tax credit for individual persons and 
married couples without children who are being hit hard by this tax.  No 
protection for senior citizens living in their own home -- their children 
are grown up.  They get no tax credit and yet they face a huge increase in 
consumption taxes. 
 
No tax credit for a minimum wage earner, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who's working 
full time at minimum wage and earning 8 or $9,000 a year.  They're going to 
be hit hard by this 7 per cent provincial GST on almost everything they 
buy.  And yet there's no tax credit for them. 
 
No tax credit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the single individual who lost their 
job, is perhaps 55 or 60 years of age; has difficulty obtaining an 
opportunity to retrain; has difficulty getting a new job; their 
unemployment insurance runs out; they're forced to go on social assistance 
-- no tax credit for that kind of an individual. 
 
All of these persons are going to be hit very hard by this new provincial 
GST.  And that is one of the reasons why we are strongly opposed to this 
tax because as I mentioned, it is not based on ability to pay.  And it 
comes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after we have had a large number of major tax 
increases by this government since they were first elected in 1982.  In 
fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I pointed out yesterday in my remarks, the 
average tax increase that a typical Saskatchewan family has faced between 
1981 and 1990 comes to 71 per cent, during a period when the average wage 
in Saskatchewan has increased by only 29 per cent.  So in effect we've seen 
a tax increase that is more than double the average wage increase in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the last nine years, huge 
increases in provincial income tax, including the imposition of the flat 
tax in Saskatchewan, which I might add is the equivalent of more than a 
10-point increase in provincial income tax.  We have seen the average 
Saskatchewan family paying $817 more in utilities in 1990 than they were in 
1981, and that includes increases in their electrical rates, their 



 

 

home-heating rates, and their car insurance far, far above the rate of 
inflation. 
 
We have seen sharp increases in the gasoline tax and an increase in the 
sales tax from 5 to 7 per cent from a government that promised in 1982 to 
eliminate the provincial sales tax.  We've seen the average family paying 
$145 a year more in prescription drug costs, and most families, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, have been hit hard by the massive increase in property taxes.  The 
average home owner in any Saskatchewan city is paying more than $500 more 
in property taxes today than they were nine years ago.  In addition, those 
taxpayers, unless they're seniors, have lost the local property improvement 
grant. 
 
All of these things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have resulted in this 71 per cent 
increase in provincial taxes prior to the imposition of the provincial GST, 
and now we are faced with a provincial GST adding another $740 a year in 
taxes to the average family -- the largest tax increase in Saskatchewan 
history. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the same time as these provincial tax increases 
have been occurring, we've also seen a major tax increase at the federal 
level. 
 
And I just want to make brief reference to this because I think it is very 
pertinent.  The average Saskatchewan family has not only faced a massive 
provincial tax increase but they have seen their federal taxes go up 
according to a study that was made public last night by an independent 
research group in Ontario. 
 
The average family in Canada is paying $1,500 a year more in taxes after 
seven years of Mulroney government than they were in 1984 -- a huge federal 
tax burden in addition to the provincial tax burden that we're debating 
here this afternoon. 
 
And those same families here in Saskatchewan and across the country have in 
addition faced tax increases from federal measures like the refusal to 
fully index family allowances, the refusal to fully index income tax 
brackets, and the steady erosion of tax credits at the federal level. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just point out these federal measures to put this tax 
in context.  It is, I think, the last straw for a lot of families in this 
province.  The provincial GST is just more than they can take in the face 
of all these major federal and provincial tax increases. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a word about how this tax is going to 
affect one group of people in my constituency, a very large group of people 
in my constituency who are studying at the University of Saskatchewan.  
More than 30 per cent of my constituents are students, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and they are going to be hit very hard by this tax. 
 
First they faced the implementation of the federal GST on many of the items 
that they buy.  Now they're facing the implementation of the provincial 
GST.  And one of the areas where it's hitting them the hardest is the 



 

 

purchase of textbooks.  The average student in my riding, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as a result of the federal GST taking effect on January 1 of this 
year, and now the provincial GST taking effect on April 1, is paying an 
additional $200 a year just in the cost of textbooks alone -- $100 extra 
because of the provincial GST and $100 extra a year because of the federal 
GST. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to put this in context again, these students are 
mostly single individuals or married couples usually without children, 
although not all, but if they have no children then they are not eligible 
for a tax credit of any sort. 
 
So these university students are faced with this major increase in the cost 
of textbooks of $200 a year with no tax credit to offset that impact.  
They're also faced with that tax increase, sir, and they receive no 
increase in student loans to account for the increased costs of purchasing 
their textbooks. 
 
At the same time, because of the policies that the government opposite has 
pursued in the area of funding for university education, they face a 
massive increase in their tuition costs as well.  Students in arts, for 
instance, on the university campus are going to face a 35 per cent increase 
in the cost of tuition in the fall.  In some colleges, Mr. Speaker, that 
increase will be in excess of 40 per cent. 
 
So not only do they face a massive increase in the cost of purchasing their 
textbooks, but also in their tuition costs.  And, Mr. Speaker, they will 
face inevitably increases in their clothing purchases and in their food 
purchases as a result of this tax. 
 
The result, sir, is that university students in my riding are going to be 
out of pocket many hundreds of dollars a year because of the new provincial 
GST.  And they're saying that at a time when the revenues that are made 
available to them, the assistance that they get through student loans is 
not increasing; and at a time when jobs in the summer are getting more and 
more difficult to obtain and government funding for summer student 
employment creation has been sharply cut back; and at a time when they face 
a continued low-wage policy by this government where the minimum wage has 
been kept down year after year by this government, it is getting more and 
more difficult, Mr. Speaker, to save for a university education. 
 
And this government has just made that process even more difficult with the 
implementation of the provincial GST and with the added cost that every 
university student will face when they go to buy textbooks this fall and 
find that between the federal and provincial GST they're paying $200 more 
on the purchase of their textbooks. 
 
And that leads me, Mr. Speaker, to one of the elements of this tax that I 
think is the most regressive and the most unfortunate, and that is the 
government's decision to levy a tax on reading materials.  This, Mr. 
Speaker, is one of the worst elements of the new provincial GST, the 
expanded sales tax in the province. 
 



 

 

(1615) 
 
It is really quite unbelievable that the government would stoop to the 
point of collecting a tax on newspapers and magazines and books and 
textbooks and other reading materials.  This in effect, Mr. Speaker, is a 
barrier to the acquisition of knowledge and information in our society.  
That is plain and simple what it is. 
 
We saw first of all the federal government erect a 7 per cent barrier on 
reading materials on January 1, and now the provincial government has 
followed that with a provincial tax on reading materials of 7 per cent as 
well.  So we have an unprecedented 14 per cent tax on reading materials.  
And in effect, Mr. Speaker, what we have is a 14 per cent tax on learning. 
 
Now traditionally we have avoided taxing books and magazines in 
Saskatchewan.  And we've avoided doing that in other Canadians provinces as 
well, because we've recognized the educational, cultural, and social value 
of books and reading materials.  The written word, Mr. Speaker, is 
absolutely central to learning.  It is central to the development of 
independent thought and to participation in democratic decision making. 
 
And to treat the written word as a taxable commodity is an outrage, Mr. 
Speaker.  The written word must be universally accessible.  And a tax on 
reading materials clearly makes the written word less accessible, 
particularly to those who are poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this tax on reading, this tax on knowledge 
and information is in effect an attack on our democratic values in Canadian 
society and in Saskatchewan society.  And we've seen the government 
opposite launch many attacks on democracy in this term of the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  This is yet another round of their attack on 
democratic rights in this province. 
 
I want to quote Glen Sorestad, the president of Thistledown Press in 
Saskatoon in my home city, who has said very eloquently, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote: The right to read is essential to freedom in any democratic nation.  
A tax on reading is analogous to taxing the right to vote.  That's why 
governments in the western world are reluctant to impose a tax on books. 
 
Yes, sir, governments in the western world have been reluctant to impose a 
tax on goods.  But not our government, Mr. Speaker.  Not our government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is this an erosion of democratic principles in a free 
society, but this is also an erosion of opportunities for Canadian cultural 
development.  Books  
 Dand other written materials are an essential part of our Canadian culture 
and its ongoing development.  And cultural development in Saskatchewan is 
being dealt a serious blow because of the decision to levy the 7 per cent 
provincial tax. 
 
And I'm very concerned about this issue, Mr. Speaker, and again I think it 
has to be put in context, because this is a government that has 
consistently attacked the development of culture in the province of 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  And one only has to look at its latest set of decisions in 
just this year alone to see that. 
 
Just a few months ago the PC government shut down the Department of Culture 
and Recreation.  They laid off most of the people who were working in the 
area of cultural policy, Mr. Speaker.  And then they announced that they 
would no longer provide direct tax dollar funding to the arts.  They said 
that the arts were going to have to rely simply on moneys raised by 
lotteries, that there were going to be no more provincial tax dollars going 
to the arts and going to culture. 
 
And it's in that context that the 7 per cent tax on reading needs to be 
viewed, Mr. Speaker.  Clearly this is part of an attack on cultural 
development in Saskatchewan, and it needs to be seen as that and it needs 
to be rejected for what it is, Mr. Speaker.  And we on this side of the 
House say loud and clear: no to the provincial GST and no to a tax on 
reading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out some of the serious 
implications that this tax on reading is going to have for the ability of 
Saskatchewan people to make their own voice heard here in this province.  
Because bookstore owners and publishers and writers are telling me, and are 
telling my colleagues in the New Democratic Party, that this tax is going 
to place the future of the publishing industry in this province in 
jeopardy.  And it's going to make life in this province more difficult for 
many of our local writers. 
 
And I want to draw that to the attention of government members opposite and 
to the attention of the public.  The Alliance Against Tax on Reading has 
pointed out that sales for books and magazines are very price sensitive and 
that a 7 per cent increase in the price of books as a result of this tax 
could easily reduce book sales by 10 to 20 per cent.  Bookstores may be 
forced to close because of the tax, Mr. Speaker.  That in effect is what 
this means.  Some bookstores will be forced to close.  Some publishers may 
be forced out of business, and this clearly means lost jobs in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Writers from our province will be more often forced to publish outside of 
Saskatchewan and will have fewer income opportunities to enjoy in their 
home province.  Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this tax is going to discourage 
writers, local writers from our province from staying in Saskatchewan and 
publishing in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as a result of this, sir, this tax is destroying the ability of 
Saskatchewan people to make their own voice heard.  This tax will mean that 
publishing houses will be more reluctant to publish the work of new writers 
and to publish low sales volume topics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point I'm trying to make here is that the publishing 
industry in this province is already fragile.  With government support and 
assistance it's gradually been built up over the last 15 to 20 years.  And 



 

 

it makes a very significant contribution to cultural life in this province.  
And that contribution is now being placed in jeopardy. 
 
And with a 7 per cent tax on reading materials, when the break-even margins 
of the publishing houses become more and more difficult to achieve, they 
are going to cut back on publishing the works of new writers.  They are 
going to rather go with proven writers, Mr. Speaker.  They are going to 
tend to publish more frequently the popular topics and they will be less 
likely to publish a book that will have a low sales volume, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as a result of those kinds of cuts that this 7 per cent tax 
necessitates, the ability of new writers and new works to come onto the 
Saskatchewan market and to be heard in this province is significantly 
reduced.  And I think that that is very, very unfortunate and one of the 
reasons why this tax on reading must be opposed. 
 
I also want to say, sir, that I find it ironic that the government would 
introduce a tax on reading materials in the year following International 
Literacy Year in Canada and in Saskatchewan and around the world.  It is 
very hard to square so-called commitment by the provincial and federal 
government to fighting illiteracy with a 14 per cent tax on books. 
 
It is not just the ability to read, Mr. Speaker, that is being attacked 
with this 7 per cent tax, but it is also the need to encourage literacy in 
specialized areas.  And I use the sciences as an example.  We need to be 
encouraging members of our society to become knowledgeable on topics of 
scientific endeavour, so that the public can help navigate a socially 
responsible role for the sciences in the decades ahead. 
 
Changes in science are moving very rapidly and many issues of science are 
also issues of public policy and government policy.  And to have a 
well-directed government policy as it pertains to scientific affairs 
requires the public not only to be literate, but to be literate on 
specialized matters of science, Mr. Speaker.  And a tax on reading makes 
that process much more difficult.  And it's another of the reasons why I 
oppose and members in the New Democratic Party oppose this very regressive 
provincial sales tax expansion. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in summary, on this matter of a tax on reading, 
that what we have with this 7 per cent provincial GST is a tax on 
information, a tax on learning, a tax on literacy, and a tax on democracy.  
In effect, Mr. Speaker, we have a tax on the things that we claim to value 
most in Saskatchewan society.  And I call on the provincial government 
today, the PC government opposite, to withdraw the provincial GST and to 
withdraw the tax on reading.  It's still not too late to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, and the time to do that is now during the debate on Bill 61. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the members opposite have said to members on this 
side of the House, so where will the money come from to replace the 
revenues lost from an expanded provincial GST?  If you're not going to 
implement the provincial GST they said, where will you get the money from?  
And I want to address that topic, Mr. Speaker, because it's a very 
important one. 



 

 

 
I want to say at the outset though that we are of the view on this side of 
the Assembly, that this tax is such a disaster for the Saskatchewan economy 
and is driving the Saskatchewan economy so deeply into recession that the 
government will not collect nearly as much revenue from this tax as they're 
expecting to.  Because we can see now with the increase in cross-border 
shopping, not just on the Saskatchewan-U.S. border, but also on the 
Saskatchewan-Alberta border more and more people are crossing the border to 
shop.  And those are lost retail sales, lost jobs, and lost revenue to the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you just need to walk into any restaurant in this province, and I have 
frequented several Saskatoon restaurants since this tax came into effect, 
and their business is down 25, 30 per cent.  Restaurants that I used to 
walk into for lunch and couldn't get a seat and you'd have to wait for 5 or 
10 minutes are now sitting half empty as a result of the new tax on 
restaurant meals.  So I suggest to you, sir, that the government will not 
raise nearly as much revenue from this tax as they're expecting. 
 
But that point notwithstanding, I want to address the question of revenue, 
alternative revenue sources, and why this in our judgement is an 
unnecessary tax measure in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, when 
we look at the provincial GST, the 7 per cent provincial GST, what we 
quickly see is that in effect what the government is now asking us to do is 
pay for their nine years of waste and mismanagement. 
 
They are asking us now, sir, to pay for the privatizations that they 
implemented and the money they didn't collect from the friends they sold to 
-- the hundreds of millions of dollars that are outstanding in money owed 
to the people of Saskatchewan from the public assets that have been sold.  
We are now, sir, being asked to pay for the fact that the PC government 
opposite for nine years forfeited hundreds of millions of dollars a year in 
loss resource revenues from the province of Saskatchewan because they 
dramatically cut back on all royalties and other royalties levied on 
resource companies in this province. 
 
And now, sir, they are asking us to pay the 7 per cent provincial GST for 
all of these reasons -- because of their waste, because of their 
mismanagement, because of their patronage, because of the unfair tax 
policies that they implemented, foregoing revenues from the corporate 
sector while they taxed individuals more and more heavily. 
 
Now, sir, I want to bring to your attention that none of the 7 per cent 
provincial GST is going towards tackling Saskatchewan's deficit -- the $5.2 
billion deficit that this government has run up over the last nine years. 
 
The government has added to the deficit again this year, just like the 
federal PCs have added to the deficit again this year at the federal level 
by some $30 billion despite the fact that they're collecting the federal 
GST.  Has the federal GST cut the PC federal deficit?  No, it has not.  
Will the provincial GST cut this government's deficit and its wild spending 
spree?  No, it will not.  The record shows, Mr. Speaker, that when this 
government takes in more revenue, it simply turns around and spends it.  



 

 

And that's exactly what it's planning to do with this new tax increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Now let's look at the record with respect to waste and 
mismanagement by this government and the alternative revenue sources that 
reducing this waste and mismanagement offers, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 
the members opposite ask, where will we get the money?  Mr. Speaker, I want 
to give a number of examples. 
 
I notice in last year's Public Accounts, sir, that the government is now 
spending some $596,944 on . . . they're giving this almost $600,000, sir, 
to a Toronto image consultant by the name of Corporate Strategy Group -- 
$600,000 spent on boosting the government's image, on providing consulting 
advice on how the Premier should dress, and on the rhetoric the PC cabinet 
ministers should use when they're trying to defend an unpopular government 
policy.  Well there's $600,000, Mr. Speaker, that an NDP government 
wouldn't be spending.  The contract with Corporate Strategy Group will be 
gone if an NDP government is elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice the government is spending $301,956 last year on 
public opinion polling with Decima Research of Toronto.  Well I think 
there's another area where significant savings can be made. 
 
I notice, sir, that the government is spending more than $500,000 a year on 
travel expenditures for PC cabinet ministers.  That, Mr. Speaker, is up 
from $294,000 the year before.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if that amount of money 
on travel can't be cut in half, then I don't know what can be.  There's 
another saving of $250,000. 
 
We've noted, Mr. Speaker, in examining the Public Accounts that the 
government is spending in excess of $30 million a year on things like 
government advertising and government printing.  And we believe that if the 
government printing budget was cut by two-thirds, some $25 million a year 
could be saved.  The government advertising budget is $1.9 million a month, 
Mr. Speaker.  And if we were to reduce that by 80 per cent, we could net a 
saving of seventeen and a half million dollars a year. 
 
We believe that government travel, not just for cabinet ministers but by 
all public servants could be reduced by at least 30 per cent, saving $15 
million a year.  And we believe, Mr. Speaker, that at least $800,000 a year 
could be saved by reducing the size of the PC cabinet by four or five 
cabinet ministers. 
 
These are some other practical examples of where the money can come from to 
make it unnecessary to implement the provincial GST. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the government continues to spend and to waste 
significant amounts of taxpayers' money on unnecessary patronage 
appointments.  For instance, the former member from Moosomin, Larry 
Birkbeck, has just received a 10-year appointment to the Saskatchewan 



 

 

Municipal Board at a cost of $57,820 a year.  And it would be interesting 
to know whether Mr. Birkbeck is the person most qualified for this 
position.  I doubt he is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My colleagues have pointed out how the government continues to waste more 
than $90,000 a year on the appointment of Mr. Bob Andrew, the former member 
of Kindersley and a former PC cabinet minister on his appointment as 
heading up the trade office in Minneapolis; and a similar amount of money 
to Mr. Graham Taylor on his appointment to head up the trade office in Hong 
Kong, Mr. Taylor again being a former cabinet minister and the former PC 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just these three patronage appointments alone take 
$250,000 a year of taxpayers' money in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
that is just the tip of the iceberg.  I've got a list here with at least 25 
or 30 major patronage appointments on them, Mr. Speaker, that in total, Mr. 
Speaker, total more than a million dollars -- a million dollars a year of 
potential savings just through the elimination of the highest profile 
patronage appointments. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's another example of where money can be saved.  But 
I say to the government members opposite, far more important is the tax 
dollars that are being lost and that are being wasted, because instead of 
making Public Service Commission hiring appointments on the basis of merit, 
you have made Public Service Commission appointments on the basis of 
people's political allegiance to the PC Party.  And that, I say, has been 
extremely expensive.  And that, sir, has meant that people who are 
unqualified to fill government positions have been placed in those 
positions at great expense to the taxpayer because there's nothing like an 
unqualified and inefficient public servant to lead to an expensive and poor 
quality job being done. 
 
The Minister of Social Services says talk about . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I'm having trouble hearing his words.  And he is 
somehow suggesting that the New Democratic Party ran the public service in 
a manner that didn't provide for appointments on the basis of merit, and I 
say to you, sir, that that is false. 
 
The public service under the Blakeney government was based on merit 
appointments and merit hiring and you know it.  You know it.  And as a 
result, we had one of the finest public services in Canada. And you have 
turned it into a trough for PC appointees.  That's what you've done.  And 
you, sir, are one of the ministers who is most responsible for doing that, 
and it's been a disgrace.  It's been a disgrace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, in regard to the members' comments here in the 
House this afternoon, again we find that these members are far from Bill 
61, far from discussing what the intent of the Bill is all about, and I'd 
ask you once again to bring, as you had done previous on many other 
speakers, bring him back to the Bill, please. 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Is there anything in particular that you want to bring to 
my attention in this instance? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, just his general remarks are totally off the 
topic.  He has not related to Bill 61.  He's been talking about the 
patronage aspects of the government and everything else.  And I would tend 
to think, Mr. Speaker, that if you could have drawn your attention to what 
the member was actually saying, you would have been right off the Bill. 
 
The Speaker: -- I've listened to the hon. member's point of order.  It's 
possible that in a debate of this nature that from time to time perhaps 
hon. members do wander from the topic.  Perhaps in this instance the hon. 
member was.  I'll listen closer to his remarks and make sure that he's on 
the topic. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I was 
simply trying to point out some areas where the government could in effect 
save money by reducing expenditures, running the public service in a more 
cost-efficient way and thereby avoiding the implementation of the 
provincial GST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to give just a couple more examples of the kind of 
waste and mismanagement that could be avoided, and by avoiding it, could 
make the implementation of this massive new tax burden unnecessary. 
 
And I've now provided examples, Mr. Speaker, that are well in excess of a 
hundred million dollars, just in the area of waste and mismanagement alone. 
 
But I couldn't let this area go without making reference to the more than 
$5 million that was wasted in the GigaText fiasco -- money that could have 
been available to Saskatchewan taxpayers to avoid the implementation of the 
provincial GST.  And that, I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, included an 
expenditure of $137,500 for a luxury condominium for a GigaText executive. 
 
Well that's the kind of wasteful spending, sir, that has brought us to this 
7 per cent new sales tax today, and that's the kind of wasteful spending 
that an NDP government will avoid, Mr. Speaker.  And there's an old saying 
around, Mr. Speaker, that if you want to save significant amounts of money 
you start by saving pennies.  A penny saved is a pound earned.  And I want 
to remind members opposite of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- It's these little expenditures when you add them up that 
add up to over a hundred million dollars, Mr. Speaker, that add up to the 
equivalent of the provincial GST and what it's going to take out of  
 Dtaxpayers' pockets. 
 
And we believe, sir, that this GST would have been unnecessary and will 
still be unnecessary if these wasteful expenditures are brought under 
control. 
 
This government, sir, in 1982 inherited a provincial budget that was some 



 

 

$2.3 billion of expenditure -- $2.3 billion of expenditure.  And nine years 
later, when inflation has only been 48 per cent, they have managed to take 
total spending to four and a half billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, four and a 
half billion dollars. 
 
In effect they have doubled the provincial budget in just nine years -- a 
95 per cent increase in provincial spending during a time when inflation 
has only been 48 per cent.  And then they say that that's not enough and 
they have to come to taxpayers and ask them to fork out another $740 a 
family.  Well we say no way to their way, Mr. Speaker.  No way to their 
way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, those examples of patronage and waste 
and mismanagement are just one set of examples of where the money could 
come from. 
 
I want to give you another example of the unfair tax policies that the 
federal and provincial PC governments have pursued, Mr. Speaker, that if 
they were corrected would make this kind of a massive consumer tax increase 
unnecessary.  And I want to talk for a moment about this policy of deferred 
taxes which has very significant implications for provincial income tax 
collection in this province and of course also for federal income tax 
collection. 
 
And one of the tricks of respective Liberal and Conservative governments at 
the federal level and the provincial level has been this policy of allowing 
hundreds of millions of dollars of tax deferrals to their corporate friends 
every year. 
 
And I want to just give a few examples of how this affects corporations 
operating in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I'll just give 
four or five examples.  I want to start with a well-known Saskatchewan 
company, Saskoil.  And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in 1989, 
Saskoil's pre-tax income was $8.114 million.  Now you would think that with 
earnings in excess of $8 million, that Saskoil would have paid some income 
tax to the provincial government.  Well do you know what their effective 
tax rate was, Mr. Speaker?  It was zero per cent, and their deferred taxes 
were equivalent to $27.336 million. 
 
Well there, Mr. Speaker, is a prime example of where money could be coming 
to offset the provincial GST.  We say stop giving Saskoil a tax break.  How 
about giving a bit of tax relief to the average taxpayer in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well I want to take another example, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is North Canadian Oils.  I just received their quarterly report.  And I 
want to point out that their 1989 pre-tax earnings in the province of 



 

 

Saskatchewan were $33.478 million.  How much tax did North Canadian Oils 
pay under the PC government, Mr. Speaker? -- a big zero.  No taxes were 
paid.  Do you know what total deferred taxes were? -- $59.733 million. 
 
What kind of a small-business man, a restaurant owner or a small clothing 
store in the province of Saskatchewan can get a tax break like that?  It's 
easy to see whose side this government is on, Mr. Speaker, and it isn't the 
small-business man in Saskatchewan.  It's the owners of the large corporate 
sector in this province, and these people opposite are on their side and 
their side alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take another example of a company, and that is Mark 
Resources -- Mark Resources, Mr. Speaker.  Mark Resources earned $157,000, 
a much smaller amount in 1989.  And do you know what their effective tax 
rate was, Mr. Speaker, on an earning of $157,000?  Well they paid $5,000 in 
income tax, for an effective tax rate of 3.2 per cent, Mr. Speaker.   Now 
there is no wage earner in this province, who could hope to pay only 3.2 
per cent on earnings of $157,000, but that's what Mark Resources was able 
to do. 
 
I want to use another example, Mr. Speaker.  And this example hits pretty 
close to home because it's WESTBRIDGE Computer company that of course the 
provincial government has a stake in.  And WESTBRIDGE Computer in 1988, Mr. 
Speaker, had pre-tax profits of $5.5 million.  And in 1989 they had pre-tax 
profits of $7.2 million.  And how much income tax do you think they paid, 
sir?  Not a penny. Not a single penny of tax paid to Saskatchewan, to the 
Saskatchewan government, to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And here is another prime example, sir, of where if WESTBRIDGE and Mark 
Resources and North Canadian Oils and Saskoil and many others that I could 
name here -- Hudson's Bay Company -- if they were asked to pay their fair 
share of income tax in the province of Saskatchewan, we could go a long way 
to eliminating the kind of tax burden imposed here by the provincial GST on 
the average, individual taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways is saying, let's talk about the 
resource industry . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member is referring to the presence 
of a member.  I ask him not to.  I might say that it is not only the 
Minister of Highways who's making an intervention; some members on the 
opposite are also.  So it isn't fair to single out one individual.  I'd ask 
you to continue. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much for your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  I do 
want to comment though on this question of resource revenues in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and the policies of the government in this area 
and how they bear, I want to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm going to ask the member for 
Regina Victoria, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, and the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena to refrain from their separate debates and allow the 
member for Saskatoon University to continue.  Thank you. 



 

 

 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to correct, Saskatoon South.  I 
was quiet. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The hon. member for Saskatoon Nutana has brought to 
my attention that it was actually the member for Saskatoon South who was 
causing the disturbance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Therefore I ask the member from Saskatoon South to allow 
his colleague, the member from Saskatoon University, to continue. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm glad there's still a role for a 
little bit of good old-fashioned humour in this debate. 
 
But I want to get serious again now, sir, and turn to the question of the 
resource royalty policy of the government directly as it pertains to the 
provincial GST. 
 
I've pointed out already that the provincial GST would have been 
unnecessary if the government had had a fairer policy with respect to the 
levying of income tax on its corporate friends.  I pointed out how the 
provincial GST would be unnecessary if the government had only curbed its 
policy of wasteful spending and patronage in the province. 
 
I now want to give a third example of how the provincial GST could be 
avoided, and that relates to the government's resource revenue policy in 
the province.  This is a third way in which moneys could be collected other 
than burdening the individual taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And on this account I want to point out that since 1982 when the PC 
government opposite was elected, there has been a very major shift in the 
way in which the resource industry in the province of Saskatchewan has been 
taxed and in the way in which royalties have been levied. 
 
And I want to turn, Mr. Speaker, to a citation from last April's edition of 
the Sask Trends Monitor for the province of Saskatchewan.  This is an 
independent news-letter on economic issues in Saskatchewan.  And the 
citation is from April, 1990, Mr. Speaker.  And I think this much more 
effectively than the rhetoric of members opposite brings home the point 
that Saskatchewan taxpayers have lost hundreds of millions of dollars as a 
result of the changes in resource policies in the province. 
 
Now the Minister for Economic Development and Diversification, and Energy 
and Mines, is a little uptight about this, Mr. Speaker, and he's making it 
evident as he continues to interrupt me in the Assembly.  So I want to 
direct my remarks to him for a minute, sir, and say to him that he and 
former ministers who have occupied the Energy and Mines position and a 
former minister from his constituency -- namely the former member from 
Thunder Creek -- you, sir, and the former member from Thunder Creek have 



 

 

sold out the people of Saskatchewan by some $4 billion dollars on lost oil 
royalties alone over the last nine years. 
 
What did the former member for Thunder Creek and the former minister of 
Energy and Mines, before he was convicted and had to give up his seat in 
the Assembly, what did that former minister do to the people of 
Saskatchewan?  Well he changed the amount of money being collected from oil 
companies in this province from some $700 million a year down to $300 
million a year, Mr. Speaker.  That was $400 million a year of lost revenue 
to the people of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, put another . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I was wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member would 
take a question. 
 
The Speaker: -- Would the member take a question? 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I'll take a question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- The member will accept the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Would the member care to tell the House how much money 
was derived from natural gas royalties in the province of Saskatchewan in 
1981? 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I don't have those figures with me.  But I want to 
acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that less money was derived from natural gas 
royalties than is currently being levied.  Less money was being derived. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- What about oil? 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- But with respect to oil, which was the point that I was 
addressing, there is an increase in natural gas royalties.  Relative to 
oil, it's small, small potatoes, Mr. Speaker, but there has been an 
increase. 
 
With respect to oil, as the minister will, I'm sure, be forced to 
acknowledge, there has been a massive decrease of some $400 million a year 
on average, Mr. Speaker.  And that cut of $400 million a year, basically, 
Mr. Speaker, translates into a loss of $400 a person in Saskatchewan or 
$1,600 a family in Saskatchewan.  That's the kind of revenue that you 
forfeited and now you're asking the average Saskatchewan family to turn 
around and pay another $740 a year in provincial GST.  And we reject that 
kind of a policy, sir, we reject it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Excuse me.  Excuse me.  The hon. member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster is on his feet. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I'm sorry for interrupting, Mr. Speaker, but I'd like to 
introduce some guests on behalf of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- The member wishes to introduce guests.  Is leave granted? 



 

 

 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a privilege on behalf of the hon. 
minister from Redberry to introduce some guests that he has from the 
Moosomin School in Cochin, Saskatchewan.  I don't have much for information 
in front of me, Mr. Speaker, but I did note that the hon. minister's tied 
up in a meeting right now and that the students will be meeting with him at 
5 o'clock and could possibly be entertaining some questions then. 
 
But I'd ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome these students, 
25 in number from Cochin, please. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 
join with the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster in welcoming the students 
to the gallery this afternoon.  It's a pleasure to have them with us and I 
hope they'll enjoy their visit to the Assembly. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to return to quoting the Sask 
Trends Monitor, which is a citation that members opposite are obviously a 
little uptight about.  And I want to quote from their April 1990 
news-letter where they say, and I quote: 
 

 Much of the blame for the current economic situation in Saskatchewan has 
been laid at the feet of the agricultural sector.  In fact, the decline in 
our resource industries has been just as dramatic and has had much more of 
an impact on the provincial treasury than has agriculture. 

 
 Partly because of the way production taxes and royalties are structured 

and partly because of the government's policy, the revenue to the 
provincial government has been falling throughout this period (beginning 
in 1981).  In 1981 and 1982, one out of every three dollars of sales was 
flowing to the provincial treasury.  By 1989, the proportion had dropped 
to about 12 per cent. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what Sask Trends Monitor is saying is that one out of every 
three dollars from sales in resources used to go to the people of 
Saskatchewan -- one out of every three dollars.  And now, Mr. Speaker,  
what Sask Trends Monitor accurately identifies is that now less than 1 out 
of every $9 goes to the people of Saskatchewan from their resources.  A 
massive loss of resource revenue as a result of the policy that the members 
opposite have implemented in the PC Party. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you think about it, that loss, which represents as I've 
indicated, some $400 million a year, would more than offset -- if it was 
being collected -- any revenues that are generated by the provincial GST, 
thereby making this new 7 per cent tax unnecessary. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to you one other citation from the 
Sask Trends Monitor.  It points out that the reduction in oil royalties and 
taxes fell from 65 per cent of sales in 1981 to 15 per cent of sales in 
1989. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just think about that.  A drop from 65 per cent of sales to 15 
per cent of sales.  And my question to the Minister of Energy and Mines is 
how can he possibly justify levying a tax of $740 a year on the average 
Saskatchewan family through this expanded sales tax when he has forfeited 
such massive amounts of resource revenues and in effect, as Sask Trends 
Monitor points out, has allowed revenues from oil to drop from 65 per cent 
of sales to only 15 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 5 o'clock, the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


