





























































Hansard: May 29, 1991


 

 

May 29/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, pursuant to 
rule 11 of the rules of the Legislative Assembly, I have four or five 
petitions which I'd like to lay before you, sir, and on the Table of the 
House. 
 
I'll read the first prayer, which I gather is allowed once, and then I'll 
following your ruling as best as I can thereafter.  These petitions are all 
of the same and they are summarized by this prayer: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And, Mr. Speaker, this petition which I shall lay before 
you, sir, has been signed by people from the communities of Warman, 
Choiceland, Garrick, Codette, Regina, Smeaton, Lanigan, Nipawin -- as 
examples of the wide-ranging protest in this petition, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- The next petition is of the same nature, Mr. Speaker.  And 
as I looked down the list of the names here, these are all . . . no, I'm 
sorry, most of them are from Prince Albert with the exception of some 
signatories who come from Saskatoon and from Duck Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet, another petition with 
the same petition and prayer.  This list of signatories come essentially -- 
in fact entirely -- from the city of Saskatoon, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again while I have your attention, I have 
another petition -- same prayer as the others with respect to the 
government stopping the provincial GST (goods and services tax).  This one 
is composed of people who have signed, and as I look down the list, all of 
these people are residents of the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the next list of petitioners, again the same 
prayer as before, and this is also a signed, completed list, signed by 
people from Shellbrook, Saskatchewan; Leask, Prince Albert, Edam, Big 
River, and one actually from Beauval, Mr. Speaker, which as we know is in 
northern Saskatchewan.  And that's a fairly good cross-section of residents 
who oppose this tax as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, before I take my place I have but two more to 
table.  This one is again the same prayer as before, urging the government 
to stop the provincial GST, and it's signed by people from Prince Albert, 
from Saskatoon, from Macdowall -- which is just outside of Prince Albert, 
as you know, sir -- Domremy, from as well Prince Albert.  I guess I've 
mentioned that.  These are the signatures here, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And finally for me today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to lay 
on the Table another petition pursuant to rule no. 11, again with the same 
prayer urging the government to stop the provincial GST.  And this has been 
signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan from Choiceland, 
Snowden, from Carrot River, from Nipawin, from Yorkton, Willowbrook.  I 
think I've mentioned Kinistino before, but I'll mention Kinistino just to 
make sure that this petitioner is identified, and of course several more 
from Choiceland.  It's my pleasure to table this petition also, Mr. 
Speaker.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce some guests. 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member has asked leave to introduce guests.  Is 
leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- With the understanding that all introductions may take 
place now. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you, and 
through you to the members of the legislature, a number of senior citizens 
who are in the east gallery today.  They've been part of a very large 
delegation of seniors who have met with the opposition because of their 
concern about the sales tax and asking that the sales tax be withdrawn.  I 
would like to ask these seniors if they will please stand to receive a warm 
welcome from the members of the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- And, Mr. Speaker, in my role as a minister to the 



 

 

seniors, I too would like to welcome them to the House.  Many of these 
seniors I've had an opportunity to talk to as I travelled around the 
province.  I'm delighted to see them here today, and I hope I have an 
opportunity to talk to them.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, 43 grade 
4 students from Columbia School in Yorkton.  They're seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they're accompanied today by two of their 
teachers, Luba Lubenko and Maureen Pankoski; and a couple of chaperons, 
Deanna Klynstra and Tammy Clark. 
 
I have kind of a soft spot in my heart for Columbia School because some of 
my children started their education in Columbia School.  And we hope that 
you enjoy the proceedings in the legislature, your tour of the building, 
and we would also wish you the best of luck in your upcoming exams and hope 
that you have a happy and safe summer. 
 
I'll be meeting with you to have pictures taken and refreshments at 2:30.  
I would ask all members to please welcome the guests from Columbia School 
in Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great pleasure today on 
behalf of the member for Milestone, which is unable to be here right at 
this moment, to introduce 25 grade 11 and 12 students from the school of 
Avonlea.  It gives me great pleasure on behalf of the member from Milestone 
to do this for him.  And I too want to thank you and welcome you all for 
coming here today, and especially the teachers, Karen Bedford and Brent 
Lothian, and bus driver Janet Day. 
 
The member will be back to have his pictures taken with you later on at 3 
o'clock and ask questions of the Assembly at 3:05.  So I hope you enjoy 
your stay and your listen and get some knowledge of what's happening here 
today.  So with that, Mr. Speaker, I'd like everybody to welcome these 
students. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my privilege 
today to introduce to you and to all members of the House, a group of 40 
grade 6 and 7 students from Osborne School near Prince Albert.  Mr. 
Speaker, these students have come a long way to view the proceedings of the 
legislature, to visit the museum, and the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) barracks as well.  Mr. Speaker, they're accompanied by their 
teachers Tom Halyk, Bob Miller and Winston Bierwirth, and chaperons Dorothy 
Cholewa, Corrine Amyotte and Barb Sluchinski.  I would ask all members to 
give them a warm welcome to the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, it's very much a pleasure to join my 
colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake in welcoming the people from Osborne 
School.  And I want to say to all these students from there to have a safe 
journey home, and it's really great to see that your teachers have brought 
you down here to Regina.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, first of all 
let me express my welcome to the senior citizens as well who have gathered 
in the legislature today to watch the actions of both the opposition and 
the government as we're involved in this historic debate.  I notice there's 
a goodly number from the constituency of Regina Rosemont, and I want to 
extend a particular welcome to those senior citizens.  I have the honour to 
represent them here in the legislature. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce another special group which is 
seated in your gallery, sir.  There are 12 adults who are students at the 
English as a second language centre in the constituency of Regina Rosemont. 
 
These students are all recent residents in the province of Saskatchewan, 
enjoying the legislature and its goings-on for the first time.  They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Elsa Turek, and Ms. Turek is with them 
here today.  We'll be meeting with those students at 2:30 or thereabouts 
for a photo opportunity on the stairs of the legislature, and for 
refreshments in Room 255 after.  And I'd ask all members of this Assembly 
to welcome these newcomers to Saskatchewan and newcomers to this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 
you, and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, some 64 
grade 8 students from Weyburn Junior High School in Weyburn. 
 
As members of the Assembly will know, at this time of the year, and because 
the teachers and students take a big interest in parliamentary democracy, 
many schools from Weyburn come to visit the legislature at this time of the 
year, and I'm pleased to have these 64 students from Weyburn Junior High 
here today.  They're seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'll be meeting with them about 2:30 to answer some questions and take some 
pictures.  They are today accompanied by their teachers Trevor Johnston, 
seated on the floor, as well as Garry Kruger, and accompanied by chaperons 
Wayne Vilcu and bus driver Anita Neilson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd ask you and all members of the legislature to join me in 
extending a warm welcome to these students, teachers, and parents from 
Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: -- I too would like to take this opportunity to make an 
introduction.  I note in the Speaker's gallery a friend of mine from my 
constituency who is here to view the proceedings of the House, Mr. Dale 
Flavel.  Please welcome Mr. Flavel. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I note a visitor 
in the east gallery, and when I say her name I'm sure that you will agree 
that she is notable for the contribution that she has made to our 
neighbourhood, to our community, and to the city of Regina. 
 
I would ask you and all members to join with me to welcome Councillor 
Doreen Hamilton, who we hope will also make a contribution to the province 
as our candidate from Wascana Plains. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
                                        

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a number of petitions on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan.  And in part, Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this 
petition have done so because of the Bill 61 that is before the 
legislature. 
 
And I would like to read, Mr. Speaker, the prayer, as I believe is 
permitted to do so, on the first petition and then, Mr. Speaker, I will 
present these to the legislature.  And in part it says . . . and the people 
are asking and requesting the Provincial Government that it does not have a 
mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increases 
which would result from the proposed provincial GST. 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, the petitions that I will be tabling today, as 
I indicated, are not just from Saskatoon, the city that I have an 
opportunity to represent, but from all over Saskatchewan.  And the first 
one that I will be tabling before the legislature today are people from 
Rosetown, from Harris, Elrose, also from Saskatoon, Milden, Indian Head, 
and Swift Current.  And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these people, I am very 
pleased to table this petition in the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, the next petition that I have again comes from 
. . . the people who have signed this petition come from various parts of 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  I note areas such as Indian Head, Qu'Appelle, Vibank, 
Odessa, Lebret.  I see here again also Regina, Sintaluta, Churchbridge, and 
so on, Mr. Speaker.  And these people have asked me again to present the 
petition for them in the legislature and I'm pleased to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- The next petition, Mr. Speaker, that I have comes from the 
south-eastern part of the province and in fact, Mr. Speaker, I think they 
all come from the constituency of Estevan which the Premier represents.  
And again these people have asked me to present the petition on their 
behalf and I am very pleased to do that at this particular time. 
 
The next petition that I will be presenting, Mr. Speaker, I note are mostly 
people from the city of Moose Jaw.  And, Mr. Speaker, we also have, I 
believe, an individual from Crane Valley who has signed this petition, and 
Pense, Saskatchewan.  And on behalf of the residents of Moose Jaw and the 
other two centres, I am pleased to present this petition to the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- The next petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the western part 
of the province.  We have people who have signed this petition coming from 
Biggar, from Elrose, and again from Rosetown.  And on behalf of these 
people, I wish to table this petition at this moment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition that I am presenting to the legislature 
today comes entirely, I believe, from Montmartre, Saskatchewan.  And I note 
one name here from Candiac, but the rest are all from Montmartre, 
Saskatchewan.  And on behalf of the people from that area, I am pleased to 
table this petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition here again from the city of Moose Jaw.  
Yes, they're all from the city of Moose Jaw.  And on behalf of the 
residents of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be able to 
present this petition in the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Tantallon, 
Saskatchewan, I am very pleased to present a petition on their behalf, 
expressing their particular views and enabling them to use their democratic 
right to present their views to the legislature through one of their 
elected representatives.  And I am pleased to present that petition to the 
legislature today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition that I wish to present on behalf of 
residents of Saskatchewan come from the south-east area of the province, 
mostly from Arcola but also from Kisbey, and Carlyle.  And again, Mr. 
Speaker, these people are expressing their concerns to the government 
through this petition, and I wish to present the petition and table it in 
the House today. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, let me now go to the south-western part of the province, the 
area of Maple Creek.  These people also have expressed their concern by 
signing the petition, and also from the town of Consul, and Dollard, I 
believe.  And they have asked through this petition for the opposition to 
present their views and let the government know their particular views.  
And on behalf of these people from Maple Creek, and Consul, I am very 
pleased to table this petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me return now to the city of Saskatoon.  And I note, Mr. 
Speaker, that most of the people who have signed this petition come from 
the area that I have had the honour to represent for the last, well, 16 of 
the last 20 years.  And these people I know would want me to mention that 
they are from that particular area of Saskatoon and they are concerned 
about what's happening in the legislature and are using the petition to 
express their views through their elected representative.  And I'm using 
this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to present their concerns to the government 
by tabling this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I now would like to turn to the north-eastern 
part of the province and the far north-east, and that is the area of Hudson 
Bay. 
 
I know a lot of people in the area of Hudson Bay, Mr. Speaker, and I know 
that they would like me to present their petition on their behalf.  And I 
notice also there's one name from Mistatim, Saskatchewan. And on behalf of 
the people of the north-eastern part of the province, I am very pleased to 
present the petition and table it in the legislature today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now would like to turn to the area surrounding Saskatoon, 
and Saskatoon itself.  I noticed on this particular petition we have people 
from Young, Saskatchewan.  We also have people from Saskatoon.  We have 
people from Clavet. And we have people from well, the city of Regina -- not 
exactly in Saskatoon but very close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these people I am pleased to present this 
petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn again to the wonderful city of Moose Jaw, 
who are certainly expressing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- The residents of Moose Jaw certainly are expressing their 
views through signing these petitions.  And I am very pleased on behalf of 
these residents who have signed this petition, who reside in Moose Jaw, to 
table this petition on their behalf today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to now turn to the eastern part of 



 

 

the province -- the eastern-central part of the province around Kamsack and 
Pelly, Saskatchewan; Veregin, and so on.  These people also are expressing 
their concerns about the issue that is before this legislature today, and 
by signing this petition are asking us, through one of their elected 
representatives, to make their views known to the government, and on their 
behalf I am tabling this petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to now return to the constituency of Estevan and 
particularly the city of Estevan.  A number of people again from the city 
of Estevan have signed this petition and are indicating their views to the 
government on the issue that is before this legislature.  I also note that 
there is one person who has signed from the village of Bienfait. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people who have signed this petition from the 
city of Estevan and the one individual from Bienfait, it gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to present this petition to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to now return to the south-eastern part of the province 
and the area of Indian Head.  I have a petition here signed mainly from the 
people of Indian Head but also from Sintaluta and Moosomin, and I see a few 
names, Mr. Speaker, of people who reside in Regina and a couple of people 
from Kendal, Saskatchewan.  On behalf of those people, Mr. Speaker, I am 
very pleased to table this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one last petition that I would like to table in the 
legislature today.  This petition is signed by people from various areas of 
the province.  We have Rosetown, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon, Alsask, Eston, 
Brock, and Zealandia, Swift Current, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people from these parts of the province of 
Saskatchewan it gives me a great deal of pleasure to present and table this 
petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Speaker.  I would 
like to table some petitions this afternoon.  To begin with, Mr. Speaker, I 
will read the prayer: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to reverse its decision to 
impose this unfair tax. 

 
The prayer of course, Mr. Speaker, is referring to the new 7 per cent GST 
on books and periodicals or reading material of Saskatchewan people. 
 
This particular petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by people in the main from 
city of Regina, although I see a signature here from Lipton, Saskatchewan, 
and a couple of signatures from Lumsden, Saskatchewan. 
 
It gives me a great deal of pleasure under rule 11(2), Mr. Speaker, to lay 
this petition on the Table for the Assembly. 
 



 

 

I have a further petition with the same prayer, Mr. Speaker and I will 
avoid reading the prayer again.  This particular petition is from mainly 
rural Saskatchewan, areas such as Punnichy, Quinton, and more from Punnichy 
and Quinton, Saskatchewan.  It gives me a great deal of pleasure to lay 
this petition on the Table for the hon. members of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have a further petition I want to refer to at this time, Mr. Speaker.  
This petition has a different prayer and I will read the prayer to acquaint 
the Assembly with the facts of the matter as regards this petition.  Under 
rule 11(2) I wish to present the petition where the prayer says: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 
 DThis particular petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by people from . . . I 
see the Lakeview area of Saskatoon, which will be in the new constituency 
of Wildwood, Saskatoon, exclusively from that area of the city, Mr. 
Speaker. And it gives me a great deal of pleasure to lay this petition on 
the Table for the members of the Assembly. 
 
The next petition, Mr. Speaker, is a petition of the same nature.  And it's 
signed by people from the city of Saskatoon exclusively.  And I want to 
take this opportunity to lay their petition on the Table under rule 11(2), 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have a further petition, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer attached.  
These people are from all over the Nutana side of the city of Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker.  I see a number of addresses that indicate how widely this 
particular petition has been circulated.  And I also see a name on here 
from Clavet, Saskatchewan, as well. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure and -- I see one from the 
constituency of Saskatoon Westmount -- I take great pleasure in laying this 
petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another petition, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer, and it's largely from 
Saskatoon city. However it's from a number of different places in the city 
of Saskatoon, would cover several different constituencies in Saskatoon.  
And I want to lay this petition on the Table for the hon. members of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to move a motion moved by myself, 
seconded by the member from Elphinstone, that notwithstanding the rules of 
this Assembly, and following the adoption of this motion, that this 
Assembly now proceed directly to the consideration of Bill No. 55, An Act 
respecting Programs to Stabilize the Income of Agricultural Producers.  And 
I do therefore move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- I would like to bring the following to the member's 
attention, from Saskatoon Westmount.  Superseding motions can only be 



 

 

introduced by leave.  You must ask leave. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I certainly want to ask leave to get to this very 
important matter, especially at this time, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 55, An Act 
respecting Programs to Stabilize the Income of Agricultural Producers in 
Saskatchewan, and I do therefore ask leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- Next member for petitions, the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Could I rise on a point of order, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: -- What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- My point of order is to inquire as to the reason why I 
do not have the floor, since I had the floor. 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member has asked leave to introduce a motion.  By 
so doing he has taken his seat and given up any further right to present 
petitions.  Therefore we move to the next member. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have for submission to the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a number of petitions under rule 11.  And the thrust 
of these petitions are that the petitioners pray that this Honourable 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the provincial government to stop the 
provincial GST until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass 
judgement on it in a provincial election. 
 
The first petition that I wish to submit is a petition signed by a large 
number of Saskatchewan residents from the city of Moose Jaw, the city of 
Saskatoon, as well as the village of Dalmeny.  And I take pleasure in 
submitting that petition for approval. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- The next petition, Mr. Speaker, to a similar effect -- not 
precisely the same effect but to a similar effect -- has been signed by a 
large number of residents of the city of Moose Jaw.  This petition was 
taken on April 17 and April 18 of this year, and I have the honour to lay 
it on the Table of this Assembly. 
 
I also have a petition, Mr. Speaker, signed by residents of Moose Jaw, 
Regina, Swift Current, Palmer, as well as one signature by a resident of 
the city of Edmonton.  And I take pleasure in tabling this petition.  Thank 
you. 
 
I have a further petition, Mr. Speaker, which has been signed by residents 
of the city . . . all from the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  And I would 
like to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, this one signed by residents of the 



 

 

city of Moose Jaw as well as a resident of Maple Creek and a resident of 
Old Wives, which I believe is in the Thunder Creek constituency.  And I 
have the honour to table that petition. 
 
I have next a petition signed by residents of my own city, Mr. Speaker, the 
city of Saskatoon, as well as one person who is a woman from the state of 
California.  And I have the pleasure to lay that petition on the Table, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The next petition that I would like to submit, Mr. Speaker, has been signed 
by a large number of residents of the city of Saskatoon, together with a 
resident of Regina, the town of Nipawin, and the town of Dundurn, 
Saskatchewan.  And I have the pleasure to submit that petition to this 
Assembly. 
 
The next petition that I would like to table, Mr. Speaker, under the same 
rule, has been signed by residents of my home city of Saskatoon, as well as 
residents of Vanscoy, and Osler -- small communities near Saskatoon -- and 
a resident of the city of Regina.  And I would like to submit that 
petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My next petition, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to table under rule 11 has 
been signed by residents of my home city of Saskatoon, all of whom come 
from the constituency of Saskatoon Eastview.  And I would like to table 
that petition. 
 
My next petition, Mr. Speaker, has been signed by a number of residents, 
all from my home city of Saskatoon.  And I, with pleasure, table that 
petition. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, that has been signed again by 
residents of my home city of Saskatoon.  And I have the honour to table on 
their behalf that petition. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, this one signed by residents of 
Bengough as well as Zealandia, and Brock.  These are communities, of 
course, in the province of Saskatchewan, and I have the honour to table 
that petition on their behalf. 
 
The next petition that I wish to table under rule 11, Mr. Speaker, is 
signed by a large number of residents of this province, all of whom live at 
various addresses in the city of Regina.  And I have the honour to table 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
My next petition, Mr. Speaker, has been signed by residents of the 
south-west part of the province, chiefly from the city of Swift Current but 
also including residents of Cabri and of Pennant.  And I have the honour to 
table this petition on their behalf. 
 
I am nearing the end, Mr. Speaker.  I have a petition here which is to the 
same effect as the previous ones which have been signed by residents of the 
city of Regina for the most part, but also including the communities of 
Pilot Butte, and Balgonie.  And it is my honour to table this petition on 



 

 

their behalf. 
 
I have another petition to table under rule 11, Mr. Speaker, and this has 
been signed by a large number of residents of the city of Regina, as well 
as the city of Moose Jaw, a resident of Saskatoon, and a resident of 
Balcarres, Saskatchewan.  And I have the honour to table this petition on 
their behalf. 
 
The next petition that I wish to file, Mr. Speaker, has been signed by 
residents of Moose Jaw, as well as Prince Albert, Regina, and Rockglen -- 
all in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I have the honour to table this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
And my final petition, Mr. Speaker, that I wish to table on this day has 
been signed by residents of Moose Jaw, as well as Medicine Hat, Calgary -- 
two people who were in the province of Saskatchewan and lent their name to 
these petitions.  And I have the honour to table this petition on their 
behalf.  And I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your patience while I table 
those documents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to ask leave to present 
petitions here in the legislature.  The petition that I'm presenting, I 
want to give the content of the prayer so that you will know what the 
petition is about.  In this petition the people are humbly praying: 
 

 . . . that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial 
Government to stop the provincial GST until the people of the province 
have an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial election. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition that I have has 10 signatures on it from 
the city of Saskatoon.  I recognize two names as constituents of Saskatoon 
Centre and the others come from other parts of the city of Saskatoon.  And 
on their behalf I'm pleased to lay this petition on the Table for the 
consideration of the members of the legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another petition also from the city of Saskatoon on the 
same topic.  The people in this petition have signed their names and they 
come from various parts of the city of Saskatoon -- Victoria Avenue, Taylor 
Street, 8th Street East, Main Street.  And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is 
duly signed and with the names printed as well and I'm pleased to lay it on 
the Table of the Legislative Assembly for consideration of the members.  
Thank you. 
 
The next petition that I have, Mr. Speaker, has a particular concern 
regarding the tax on reading.  The prayer on this petition is: 
 

 . . . that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial 
Government to reverse its decision to impose this unfair tax. 

 
And this petition has 20 signatures on it, all of them from the town of 
Davidson, Saskatchewan, except for one from Elbow, Saskatchewan.  And on 



 

 

behalf of the 20 petitioners, I'm pleased to lay this petition on the Table 
for the consideration of the members of the Assembly. 
 
A similar petition on the same topic, Mr. Speaker, again with 20 
signatures.  Most of the people on this petition live in Davidson, 
Saskatchewan.  There's someone from Girvin.  There's a signature from 
Bladworth; two from Bladworth, Mr. Speaker.  And on behalf of these 20 
petitioners, I'm pleased to lay their petition on the Table for the 
consideration of the members. 
 
The petition that I now want to put on the Table, Mr. Speaker -- 2, 4, 6, 7 
signatures from the town of Milestone, Saskatchewan.  And this is a 
petition similar to the first one that I introduced here, and the 
signatures seem to be all in order so I'm pleased to lay this petition on 
the Table for consideration of the members. 
 
Most of the people on this petition, again on this same topic, Mr. Speaker, 
come from the city of Saskatoon.  There's a signature here from Meadow Lake 
and one from Elrose, Saskatchewan.  And on behalf of these petitioners I 
submit this petition for our consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding when we present petitions that they must 
have a minimum of three signatures on them in order to be recognized by the 
Legislative Assembly.  This petition has three signatures from the city of 
Saskatoon on the same topic, and I'm pleased to present it on behalf of the 
people on that petition. 
 
(1445) 
 
And this petition that I have also has the minimum of three signatures, but 
they are all in order with the signature and the printed name and the 
address, all from the city of Saskatoon.  I present it to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this time I have a petition from several places -- fully 
20 signatures on this petition -- from Regina, from White City, from 
Balgonie and from many streets and addresses in Regina.  It looks all in 
order.  It's on the same topic as the other petitions and I'm pleased to 
present it to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Again a petition from Regina, from Garnet Street, Queen Street, Bowman, 
Forsyth, all of the signatures on here are from Regina, 16 signatures.  And 
it's on the topic of the others so I've signed it and I'm pleased to 
present it to the legislature today. 
 
Now this petition that I'm presenting, which is on the same topic, Mr. 
Speaker, has a full 20 signatures on it.  And the people on this petition 
come mainly from the city of Weyburn, Saskatchewan.  There are two or three 
people from Yellow Grass, Viceroy, Fillmore, and Corning, Saskatchewan.  
And on behalf of these people who have signed this petition and printed 
their names very clearly, I present the petition on their behalf for the 
consideration of the Assembly. 
 



 

 

And this petition has four signatures.  It looks like all of them are from 
Weyburn, Saskatchewan.  And again I present these four signatures for the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have 20 signatures now, all from the city of Regina, all on the same 
topic, all signed, sealed, and delivered, as they are supposed to be.  And 
so I present them to the Legislative Assembly for our consideration. 
 
This is another petition, all from the city of Regina and contains 11 
signatures.  So I present it for our consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition that I'm going to present has 20 signatures on 
it.  It's signed and printed but it contains only street addresses so I'm 
not sure what community it's from.  I think it may be Regina, but they live 
on Schiller Bay, Blackwood Street North, Bennett Drive, Beamish Drive, 
Lawrence Drive, Dolan, Wadge, Lanigan Drive, Stephens Bay, again, Hind 
Street, Whelan Drive, Spooner Drive, Kenderdine Drive.  This is from 
Erindale -- I recognize it now -- the Erindale community of Saskatoon.  So 
on behalf of the petitioners from Erindale, Saskatoon, I present that. 
 
This petition, on the same topic, Mr. Speaker, contains 20 signatures.  
Most are from Saskatoon but there are signatures here . . . one from 
Estevan, two, three, four, five from Estevan -- five from Estevan on this 
petition and the rest are from Saskatoon.  And I present this petition for 
our consideration and lay it on the Table. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, this petition that I have . . . this petition that 
I'm presenting with 20 signatures on it is mostly from Estevan.  Almost all 
the signatures are from Estevan, one from Lampman -- signed and printed and 
fully complied with in terms of the rules of the legislature, so I present 
it to our Assembly today. 
 
Again on the same topic, Mr. Speaker, this one is also from Estevan, and 
Bienfait, and North Portal, Saskatchewan.  From all over the province 
people are presenting petitions on the same topic, and I'm pleased to lay 
it on the Table on their behalf. 
 
And another petition -- full -- 20 signatures all from Estevan, except one 
from Benson.  And it looks like they're all signed properly.  I've signed 
them and I present it to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now this petition takes us back to Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  There are two, 
four, six, eleven signatures on this petition from Clarence Avenue North, 
College Drive; one from Warman, Saskatchewan; one from Langham, 
Saskatchewan; the others from Saskatoon.  And on their behalf I present 
this petition to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all these petitions that I've been presenting are on the same 
topic, as is this one which contains a number of signatures.  And it's 
interesting that this petition has been signed in Saskatoon, in Maidstone, 
someone from North Battleford, and two people from Regina have signed this 
petition.  And everything's in order.  I present it on their behalf to the 
Legislative Assembly. 



 

 

 
This is a petition from Saskatoon.  I certainly recognize these streets -- 
Lake Crescent, Main Street, 10th Street East, and McLellan Avenue.  A 
number of signatures of petitioners which I am pleased to lay on the Table 
on behalf of those residents of Saskatoon. 
 
And this one as well is mainly people from Saskatoon -- 10th Street, 
Kingsmere Boulevard, Taylor Street, Hilliard Street, 11th Street.  But 
there's a signature here from someone from Nipawin and one from 
Lloydminster.  And on their behalf I present this petition to the 
Legislative Assembly, and I've signed it as I'm supposed to do. 
 
Some of these petitions come from the downtown area of Saskatoon, which I 
am more familiar with than I was with the community of Erindale which is a 
new area in Saskatoon.  This one is from people in the . . . more in the 
centre of the city of Saskatoon -- Colony Street, and University Drive, 
Dufferin Avenue, 15th Street East, and Thompson Avenue, and 14th Street 
East.  And on behalf of these petitioners on the same topic, Mr. Speaker, I 
present this petition for the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Another petition with a minimum of three signatures on it -- but that's in 
order, according to the rules of the Assembly -- so I present these three 
petitioners on the same topic and ask that the Assembly give due 
consideration to their concerns. 
 
This is another petition from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, with two, four, six, 
eight, ten, twelve, thirteen signatures on it; two from Bradwell, 
Saskatchewan, actually, and the rest from Saskatoon from a variety of 
streets -- Cory Avenue, McKercher, 14th Street, Bottomley Avenue.  On their 
behalf I present this petition to the legislature on the same topic as 
before. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I have a petition mainly from the  
 Dpeople in Bulyea, Saskatchewan; one from Silton, and a signature from . . 
. two from Silton, and it's a full petition with 20 signatures, with the 
signatures and the printed names and the telephone numbers, Mr. Speaker, on 
the same topic.  And I'm pleased on behalf of these petitioners to present 
this petition. 
 
And this petition is similar.  I'm getting very close to the end of the 
petitions that I have to present today.  They're all on the same topic.  
And this one is full, with 20 signatures all from Bulyea, Saskatchewan; 
Silton.  And they ask our consideration of the topic under review, and I'm 
pleased to lay this petition on their behalf. 
 
And my final petition today, Mr. Speaker, comes from Bulyea, Strasbourg, 
Regina, and Silton -- 20 signatures, 20 printed names, and the telephone 
numbers.  And I lay this on behalf of the petitioners.  I draw this to the 
attention of the Legislative Assembly and hope that we will address their 
concerns.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too join my colleagues in 
presenting a petition pursuant to rule 11 of the Legislative Assembly: 
 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the Province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- The people on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from 
the Argyle Park area of Regina.  And I see a couple of signatures from 
Craven as well, so it has a rural component to it.  I am pleased on behalf 
of my constituents and a couple of other people to submit this petition to 
the legislature.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with the same prayer, of course.  This 
time the petitioners are from the Coronation Park area of Regina, again an 
area that I am currently the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for, 
so I am very pleased on behalf of these people to table this petition in 
the legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Good MLA, too. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you.  And thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition, this time primarily from Regina, but 
I see a couple of signatures from McLean, Saskatchewan; Coronation Park, 
and east of Coronation Park in the Highland Park area of Regina but 
described as north-central Regina.  On behalf of the 24 people who have 
taken the time to sign this petition, it is my duty and honour and 
privilege to table the petition here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition, this time from Regina -- it looks like the 
same general north-central area of Regina -- and on behalf of these 
petitioners, I'm pleased to table this petition. 
 
The next petition I have, Mr. Speaker, comes from the north Highland Park 
area of Regina, and one signature I notice the address is from south-east 
part of Regina.  And I'm pleased on behalf of these people to table this 
petition. 
 
The next petition I have is . . . looks like much closer to the centre of 
the city of Regina, I believe from the constituency of Regina Elphinstone.  
It is my pleasure and honour to submit this petition for the consideration 
of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my responsibility to submit this petition -- people from 



 

 

Uplands, from Coronation Park, from Walsh Acres, all of those 
neighbourhoods in Regina.  I see some other signatures from right down town 
in Regina.  And it is my pleasure and my duty and my honour to table this 
petition. 
 
(1500) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I can't believe the interest that's maintained in the 
gallery today. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, it's hard to believe that somebody could nod off, 
watching from the Speaker's gallery.  But the next petition that I have is 
from the Argyle Park community, again an area that I represent.  And this 
is serious, that I represent these people.  I am pleased and honoured and 
duty-bound to present this petition on behalf of my constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The next petition I have is from the 
Uplands area of the city of Regina, the north-east corner.  We anchor the 
city right by the Co-op Refinery.  And on behalf of the 20 or so people 
who've taken the time to sign this petition, I am duty-bound to present the 
petition, as is my honour to do so, to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have a petition, this time from Argyle Park, exclusively from Argyle Park 
by all of the records here.  It's an area that I represent and I'm very 
honoured that the people have chosen me to do so.  I'm pleased on behalf of 
these residents of Argyle Park in the north end of Regina to submit this 
petition, which is along the lines of every other petition I have presented 
this day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, and I'm sure the people of Argyle Park, where this 
petition comes from, also appreciate the applause on their behalf for them 
having taken the time to sign this petition with the same prayer as the 
previous ones. Again on behalf of the 20 or so residents of Argyle Park, 
I'm pleased to present this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with signatories from Pilot 
Butte and from Strasbourg and a few from Regina itself.  It is my pleasure 
to present this petition, which is in the exact same form as the other 
petitions I have presented thus far today. 
 
The next petition I have comes from primarily Saskatoon.  There is also a 
signature from Prud'homme.  The Saskatoon is 108th Street, Wollaston 
Crescent, Lakeview, McKercher, East Hill, Smoothstone Crescent. And on 
behalf of the 20 signatories of this petition, it is indeed my pleasure to 
table this petition for the consideration of the government and the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, the asleep have woken.  It is my pleasure this time to present 
a petition from Balgonie, Regina Beach, Regina city proper.  There's 23 
signatories on this petition, which is in the same form as all of the other 
petitions.  I'm delighted on behalf of these 23 people to table this 
petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from the city of Saskatoon.  
There's 20 signatures representing 20 people from Saskatoon who have taken 
the time and made the effort to sign this petition opposing the provincial 
GST and asking the government to stop passage.  I table the petition. 
 
I have a petition this time, Mr. Speaker, from Coronation Park, from the 
Uplands area, and from the extreme north-west part of the city of Regina.  
And on behalf of the just-shy-of 20 people who have taken the time to sign 
this petition, it is my duty, my privilege, and my honour to table this 
petition before the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this time we're back to Saskatoon with 20 more signatures, 20 
more people who are following the same prayer as the previous petitions.  
And on behalf of these 20 people, I am delighted to be able to table this 
legislature here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition I have is again from the Argyle Park 
community in the north end of Regina.  Although it's interesting, there's 
another signature from Moosomin, Saskatchewan; one from Regina Beach, and 
several from the Coronation Park area; but primarily from Trifunov 
Crescent, Magee Crescent, Schneider Crescent, and one from Walsh Acres on 
Dalgleish Drive.  On behalf of this petition with 20 signatures of the 
people who have signed it, it is my duty, my honour, my privilege, my 
pleasure, to table this petition with the others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here primarily from Saskatoon, although 
there is a signature from a woman from Outlook as well.  Outlook is a 
community that I lived in for a year, so I'm pleased to be able to table 
this petition with 20 signatures, the same prayer as the previous ones.  
I'm pleased to lay this before the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have a petition . . . this time the petitioners who have taken the time 
to sign this petition come from Walsh Acres in the north-west part of the 
city of Regina.  Many of these are relatively neighbours of mine, living 
within three or four blocks of where I live.  And it is my pleasure, again, 
to submit this petition for the consideration of the government and the 
Legislative Assembly.  Thank you. 
 
I have a petition with 20 signatures, primarily from Saskatoon.  Again, a 
signature from Outlook and one from Lanigan and one from Imperial.  I 
suspect you would . . . oh, and one from Delisle.  So a fairly broad 
cross-section but primarily from the city of Saskatoon.  On behalf of these 
20 signatories, it is my honour, my duty, my privilege, and my pleasure to 
table this petition. 
 



 

 

I have a petition from the south-east part of the city of Regina and there 
is . . . it looks like about 14 signatures on this one -- yes, it's 14.  On 
behalf of these people in south-east Regina, it is my pleasure to table 
this petition.  This petition having the same prayer, Mr. Speaker, as all 
of the previous petitions that I've submitted today. 
 
I have a petition from Unity, Maidstone, Cut Knife, Baldwinton, North 
Battleford, with 20 signatures on it.  On behalf of these 20 people from 
the north-west part of the province, it is my pleasure and honour to be 
able to table this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from my own neighbourhood, from Walsh 
Acres.  The signatories on this are primarily from Rink Avenue in Walsh 
Acres.  And on behalf of these people who've taken the time to sign this 
petition, Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege, my honour, my pleasure, and my 
joy and my duty to table this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from Saskatoon, exclusively from Saskatoon, 
but chock-full, 20 signatures on it.  People signed the petition with the 
same prayer as all of the prior petitions, and on behalf of these 20 people 
from Saskatoon I submit this petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with 20 signatures from the 
Indian Head-Wolseley constituency.  Signatures from Wolseley, Lemberg, 
Montmartre, Grenfell, Windthorst -- I believe I said Montmartre -- from 
that area. And on behalf of these 20 petitioners, who are currently without 
an MLA, I am pleased to present this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with the required number of signatures, all 
of them from Regina, all of them from Regina.  On behalf of this multitude 
of people from Regina, I present this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from White City, Regina, 
Kronau, Saskatchewan; and the rest from Regina.  It looks like a dozen 
signatures on this petition.  It is my duty and pleasure to table this 
petition for the consideration of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
 DThe next petition has 20 signatures from Argyle Park, rural Regina, and I 
recognize one as being in Walsh Acres in north-west Regina.  Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of these 20 people, it is my pleasure to table the petition. 
 
I have two final petitions, Mr. Speaker.  This one from Saskatoon, 
Bradwell, Hanley, and back to Saskatoon.  So, Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure and privilege to submit this petition on their behalf. 
 
I have my final petition of today, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased on behalf of 
the 20 people from Archerwill, Tisdale, Carragana, Bjorkdale, McKague, 
Melfort, and Nipawin -- on behalf of these 20 people I am honoured and 
pleased to present this petition urging the provincial government to stop 



 

 

the GST until after the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you for your consideration this day.  That's the final 
petition for me today.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to deliver to the 
legislature a number of petitions signed by citizens from across 
Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to read the petition into the 
record and the petition reads as follows: 
 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the Province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these constituents are from the city of Saskatoon.  They live 
in the constituency that I've been elected to represent and have the honour 
to represent.  These constituents come from Main Street -- in fact, I 
noticed that a next-door neighbour of mine has signed the petition -- as 
well as Cairns Avenue, Wiggins Avenue, 7th Street, 3rd Street, 5th Avenue, 
1802 Alexandra Avenue, and 23rd Street East.  All of these constituents 
live in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I am pleased to be able to represent them and I am pleased to be able to 
add their voice to the thousands of other people that have signed this 
petition in the last couple weeks, Mr. Speaker.  And I lay this petition on 
the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition.  Once again the signatories come from 
the constituency that I have the honour to represent in the city of 
Saskatoon.  Persons have signed this petition who live on 9th Street, Ruth 
Street, 6th Street, McKinnon Avenue, 5th Street, Taylor Street, William 
Avenue, Belfast Avenue, 4th Street, Gladmer Park, MacKenzie Crescent, 
Brabant Crescent, Park Avenue, Mr. Speaker, as well as William Avenue.  
Most of these constituents live in the constituency that I represent and 
I'm pleased to once again add their voice to the thousands of others that 
have signed this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the city of Saskatoon.  Once 
again many of the people that have signed this petition live in the 
constituency that I represent.  Mr. Speaker, I see many of my own friends 



 

 

and neighbours that have signed this petition.  They live on Broadway 
Avenue, Maple Street, 8th Street, Lorne Avenue, East Heights, 1st Street, 
McKinnon Avenue, St. Charles Avenue, Munroe, Cairns Avenue, 14th Street 
East, 2nd Street, Coldspring Rise.  As well, Mr. Speaker, there is one 
constituent that has signed this petition from Hepburn, Saskatchewan.  And 
once again I am pleased to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here that has been 
signed by a number of rural residents.  These people live in Chamberlain, 
Moose Jaw, Regina, Paradise Hill, Dilke, Saskatchewan; as well as 
Findlater, and Regina.  Mr. Speaker, a number of citizens have taken their 
opportunity to sign the petition, which is their democratic right, and once 
again I'm honoured to be able to present these signatures to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that's been signed by the people of 
Saskatoon and I'd like to read their addresses into the record, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think it's important that citizens know that their 
petition that has been signed by them is being read into the record.  And 
once again, Mr. Speaker, these citizens come from Saskatoon.  They live on 
7th Street, McKercher Drive, Woodward Avenue, 111th Street, Kingsmere 
Boulevard, McKercher, Parkdale Road, Grant Street, Waterloo Crescent, St. 
Andrews Avenue, McKinnon Avenue, Eastview, Trident Crescent, Highlands 
Place, and Hunt Road. 
 
Many of these people are represented by myself, Mr. Speaker, but other 
colleagues that represent the city of Saskatoon also have constituents that 
have signed this petition and exercised their democratic right to sign the 
petition.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that has been signed by a number of 
citizens, many of whom reside outside of the city of Saskatoon.  And I want 
to read their towns into the record.  Citizens from Allan, Saskatchewan; 
Climax, Saskatchewan; Marchwell, Saskatchewan; Clavet, Saskatchewan; Young, 
Saskatchewan; and McNab Park have signed this petition; as well as citizens 
living on Brabant Crescent in Saskatoon, Avenue S North; as well as Guelph 
Crescent, Wakaw Court.  As well, Mr. Speaker, a citizen from rural route 
Saskatoon has signed this petition.  And I'd like to put these signatures 
onto the public record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here signed by several residents from 
the city of Regina as well as residents living in Watrous, Saskatchewan.  
Mr. Speaker, these people did not indicate what addresses they come from, 
but they definitely come from the city of Regina.  And once again, Mr. 
Speaker, I'd like to lay these signatures on the public record and I am 
pleased to present you with this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again citizens from Regina have exercised their 
democratic right to sign this petition.  All of the signatories are from 
the city of Regina.  And I'm pleased to be able to deliver this petition to 
the Legislative Assembly on behalf of these citizens. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have another petition that has been signed by a number of 
residents in the city of Regina.  They come from Hastings Crescent, McRead 
Place, Dalgliesh Drive, Melville Avenue, Rink Avenue, Dorothy Street, 
Dewdney Avenue, Carter Crescent, Bowman Avenue, Montague Street, Royal 
Street, Hughes Street, Venture Road, Mikkelson Drive, Rae Street, Straub, 
and Minot Place, Mr. Speaker.  And once again I'm pleased to be able to lay 
this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of other citizens have signed this petition from the 
city of Saskatoon.  They live on Cascade Street, Louise Street, Sparling 
Crescent, and Louise Avenue, Mr. Speaker.  All of these citizens have 
demonstrated that they have the right to sign a petition in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And as an elected member of the legislature for the city of 
Saskatoon, I am pleased to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I have another petition from the city of Saskatoon.  
These citizens come from across the city and I want to read their addresses 
into the record.  They live on 107th Street, Arlington Avenue, Garvie Road, 
109th Street, 7th Street East, 104th Street, Jessop Avenue, R.R. Saskatoon, 
Austin Crescent, Central Avenue, Cumberland Avenue, 110th Street, 8th 
Street, Boychuk Drive, and Begg Crescent.  Many of these constituents, Mr. 
Speaker, reside in the constituency represented by the member for 
Sutherland, and on his behalf and on behalf of all the MLAs on this side of 
the House, I want to lay this petition on the public record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the city of Saskatoon.  Once 
again the citizens that have signed this petition come from across the 
city.  As well, Mr. Speaker, I note that there are some citizens from rural 
Saskatchewan that are exercising their democratic right to sign the 
petition.  As well, Mr. Speaker, I see some signatories from out of 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these citizens come from Coy Avenue, Neill Crescent, 27th 
Street West, Argyle, Wickenden Crescent, Birch Crescent, Mr. Speaker.  As 
well, citizens from Vonda, Saskatchewan; Meacham, Saskatchewan; and I note 
a citizen from Regina has exercised his democratic right.  As well, Mr. 
Speaker, there are obviously some visitors from Winnipeg, Manitoba, and 
they have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here, once again signed by citizens 
from the city of Saskatoon, as well as some citizens from Winnipeg, and 
Hanley, Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, these citizens from the city of 
Saskatoon live on 113th Street, and the other citizens have not indicated 
where they reside but obviously they're from the city of Saskatoon.  And on 
their behalf, Mr. Speaker, I want to enter this petition into the public 
record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the city of Saskatoon.  Once 
again most of the citizens have indicated their addresses and I want to 
read their addresses into the public record.  They live on Langevin 
Crescent, 108th Street, Annabel Street, Main Street, Avenue K North, 
Waterloo Crescent, McKercher, Zeman Crescent, Westview Place, and Bradwell 



 

 

Avenue.  As well, Mr. Speaker, we have some citizens from R.R. Saskatoon 
that have signed this petition, along with citizens from Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan.  And on their behalf I want to read this petition into the 
public record and deliver it to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here.  Once again, people from across 
the city of Saskatoon are signing the petition which urges the government 
to do something.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to read their addresses into the 
record.  They live on 111th Street, Rayner Avenue, 110th Street. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Central Place, Mahoney Drive, Avenue I North, Kenderdine, 
Whiteswan Drive -- along with some citizens from rural route Saskatoon -- 
Grant Street, 4th Avenue North, Mr. Speaker, as well as some citizens from 
Clavet, and Smiley, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of these citizens live in what is called Sutherland in 
the city of Saskatoon, and on behalf of the member from Sutherland, I want 
to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here that has been signed by a number 
of citizens from across the city of Saskatoon; once again, Mr. Speaker, 
citizens who have obviously travelled into the city to do some shopping 
have signed the petition.  Citizens from Middle Lake have added their 
signatures to this petition, along with their counterparts in Saskatoon who 
reside on Richmond Place, Duchess Court, Garfield Street, Reid Terrace, 
33rd Street, 3rd Street, Tait Place, Reid Road, Needham Crescent, as well 
as Sturgeon Terrace, 7th Avenue North, Argyle Avenue, Rayner Court.  As 
well, Mr. Speaker, I note that there are two signatures here from Laird, 
Saskatchewan.  And on behalf of all of these citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan, I'm pleased to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now have a petition that has been signed by citizens from 
Regina, Saskatchewan, and these citizens appear to live across the city of 
Regina.  They live on Gore Place, Castle Road, 8th Avenue North, Read 
Avenue, McCormick Crescent, Flexman Crescent, Rink Avenue, Krivel Crescent, 
Rae Street, Coldwell, Angus, as well as Fulton Drive, Dorothy Street, Maple 
Grove Crescent I believe it is, Gore Place, and Champ Crescent. 
 
And on behalf of all of these citizens from the city of Regina, I'm pleased 
to deliver this petition to the members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have another petition that has been given to me on 
behalf of a number of citizens who reside in the city of Regina, as well as 
Yorkton, Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, on their behalf I am pleased to 
lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here from the city of Regina.  These 
citizens appear to live all across the city of Regina, and I want to read 
their addresses into the public record.  They live on Cooper, 1st Avenue 
North, Hansen Drive, Gariuk Crescent, Halleran Crescent, Rochdale 
Boulevard, Hanbidge Crescent, Montague, Krivel Crescent, Runciman Crescent, 



 

 

1st Avenue North, Baird Street, Kelsey Street, and Gordon Road.  And on 
behalf of all these citizens, I am pleased to lay this petition on the 
Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one final petition that I'd like to read into the 
public record.  These citizens all come from the city of Regina.  Many of 
the citizens have taken the opportunity to sign their addresses and I'd 
like to read their addresses into the public record.  Their addresses are 
Donald Street, Dewdney Avenue, Hunt Crescent, Atchison Crescent, Ortman 
Bay, Arnason Street. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, a number of citizens did not take their opportunity 
to sign their addresses but they all come to the city of Regina, and on 
behalf of these citizens I am pleased to lay this petition on the Table.  
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
submit a petition to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  It's a 
petition signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that 
the provincial government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, would like to see this tax Bill withdrawn 
by the province of Saskatchewan.  A number of these petitioners come from 
the city of Regina.  This particular petition also has people from 
Montmartre, and Balcarres, Mr. Speaker.  And I take pleasure in presenting 
this to the Assembly.  Thank you. 
 
I have here another petition, Mr. Speaker, drawn in the same vein as the 
former one, which is signed by residents from Regina, and one resident from 
Beechy, by residents from Pilot Butte, from Strasbourg, from McTavish 
Street in Regina, and a number of other Regina signatures as well.  And I 
take pleasure in submitting this to the Assembly.  Thank you. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, opposing the provincial GST, 
signed by a number of residents from Saskatoon, in particular from 
Kingsmere Boulevard, from Cumberland Avenue, from Riel Crescent, from 
Calder Court in Saskatoon, from Bell Crescent, Middleton Crescent, and 4th 
Avenue South, and also from MacLean Crescent in Saskatoon. 
 
There are also a number of other petitioners who have signed this petition 
from Saskatoon but have not given a specific address.  And I take pleasure 
in presenting this petition to the Legislative Assembly on behalf of these 
residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, another petition which is to be submitted to the 
Legislative Assembly today, signed by residents of the city of Prince 
Albert in the province of Saskatchewan, in particular from 20th Street East 



 

 

and also from . . . well it looks as though all of these individuals who 
have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the area of 20th Street 
East in the city of Prince Albert.  And on their behalf I submit this to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have here another one which is also signed by residents from the city of 
Prince Albert, from 9th Street East in Prince Albert, from 15th Street West 
in Prince Albert, from 6th Avenue in Prince Albert, from Watson, 
Saskatchewan -- there is one petitioner from Watson, Saskatchewan -- from 
McDougall Crescent in Prince Albert, and the other petitioners who have 
signed the petition have not given a specific address but they are from the 
city of Prince Albert.  And I take pleasure in presenting this to the 
Legislative Assembly on behalf of these petitioners and residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have here another petition, Mr. Speaker, opposing the GST, from residents 
of Wolseley and residents of Regina, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I take 
pleasure in presenting this petition to the Legislative Assembly on behalf 
of these individuals. 
 
I have here another petition, Mr. Speaker, from residents of Regina in the 
province of Saskatchewan, in particular from Dewdney Avenue, from King 
Street, from Rae Street, a petitioner from Retallack Street, another one 
from Froom Crescent in Regina, another one from Bond Street in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, a petitioner from McTavish Street in Regina, Queen Street, another 
one from Rae Street, petitioners from Montague, Dewdney Avenue, Mr. 
Speaker, petitioner from Argyle Street, another one from Rae Street and 
Garnet Street.  These are all names that the people of Regina are very 
familiar with.  A petitioner from Dewdney Avenue and from the outskirts of 
Regina, and a petitioner from Princess Street in the city of Regina.  All 
these petitioners have put their signature to this petition and I take 
pleasure in submitting their petition, Mr. Speaker, to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I have here also another petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, signed primarily by 
residents from the city of Saskatoon.  There is one signature from Regina 
on this particular petition, but most of the signatures . . . from Regina, 
and Guernsey is another location, but most of them are from locations like 
Ewart Avenue in Saskatoon, Blain Avenue, Drinkle Street, Cumberland Avenue, 
Middleton Crescent, and there's one from Carleton Drive, and East Centre, 
and Irvine Avenue in Saskatoon.  I take pleasure in submitting this 
petition to the Legislative Assembly on behalf of these residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have here another petition, Mr. Speaker, from more Saskatchewan 
residents.  These residents live in Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan, in Duffield in 
particular -- yes, Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan.  And I take pleasure in 
submitting this to the Legislative Assembly on behalf of these residents of 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, that is signed by more 



 

 

residents from Saskatchewan opposing the GST.  We have people who live on 
Bothwell Crescent, Kangles Street, Forget Street, Garnet Street, Quebec 
Street, Royal Street, Fort Street, Osler Street, Ellison Crescent, Dewdney.  
They come from Douglas Avenue, MacKay Street,, Lorne Street, Glen Elm 
Court, Broad Street, 10th Avenue -- all these addresses located in the city 
of the Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have a resident of Craven who has signed this particular petition, 
a resident from Cormorant Drive, another one from Inglis Bay.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I take great pleasure in tabling this petition signed by these 
residents from the province of Saskatchewan, many of them from my city of 
Regina.  On behalf of these residents I submit this to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, from more residents of the city 
of Regina opposing the provincial goods and services tax.  They live . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is entering into debate, 
and I'd ask her not to enter into debate on this presentation of the 
petitions. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I didn't intend to enter into debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is not to make reflections 
on rulings from the Chair. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
These residents are from Queen Street, Broder Street, McTavish Street, 
Massey Road, Broad Street, 8th Avenue, 1st Avenue North, Wascana Street, 
Dalgliesh, Whelan Drive, McInnes Crescent, another from Dalgliesh, Runciman 
Crescent North.  All these petitioners have signed this petition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I take a great deal of pleasure in tabling this 
petition for the attention of the members opposite.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, signed by residents 
from the province of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are from Kamsack.  
They're from Moosomin.  They're from Swift Current.  They're from Balgonie.  
They're from Regina, Saskatchewan.  The addresses in Regina are Angus 
Crescent, Ottawa Street, Shaw Street, Cornwall Street, Whelan Street, 
Wallace Street, Hamilton Street.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take a great 
deal of pleasure in presenting this petition on behalf of these residents 
of Saskatchewan to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, from residents in Regina and 
other locations in Saskatchewan.  They live at addresses such as Rae Street 
and Queen Street and Habkirk Drive -- which is incidentally in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker -- Princess Street, McCarthy -- another one of my 
constituents -- Merlin Crescent, Dewdney Avenue, Michener Drive, Edenwold 
Crescent, Forget Street, King Street, McCarthy, Kiev Bay, Kangles.  There's 
also a resident from Cupar, Saskatchewan, who has signed this petition, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker.  And on behalf of these residents and on behalf of my constituents 
in Regina Lakeview, I take a great deal of pleasure in submitting their 
petition to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition, another petition 
from residents across Saskatchewan who are from Balgonie, who are from 
Regina, who are from Lumsden, who are from Kylemore, who are from Wadena, 
who are from Regina again.  And a number of Regina residents have signed 
this particular petition, Mr. Speaker.  And I take a great deal of pleasure 
in submitting this petition to the Legislative Assembly, for the attention 
of the government, on behalf of these citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have here another petition, Mr. Speaker, signed by people 
from Regina, from Saskatoon, and from other locations in Regina and 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, numerous more petitioners.  And I take a great deal 
of pleasure in submitting their petition for the attention of this 
government.  So I submit it on their behalf to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, another petition, 
most of whom are Regina residents from locations such as Blakeney Crescent, 
from Rae Street, from Fairview Road in Regina, from Montreal Crescent, from 
Salemka Crescent, from McDonald Street, from Parliament Avenue.  That again 
would be one of my constituents, Mr. Speaker.  From Bond Street, from Walsh 
Acres. Oh yes, and there are also petitioners from Moose Jaw on this 
petition. 
 
(1545) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And from Munroe Place in Regina, Rae Street, Connaught 
Street, 3rd Avenue North in Regina.  And these petitioners have signed this 
petition, Mr. Speaker, so that we can submit it to the Legislative 
Assembly, and on their behalf I do so this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, which I take a 
great deal of pleasure in submitting on behalf of residents of Caronport in 
the province of Saskatchewan, on behalf of residents of Regina in the  
 Dprovince of Saskatchewan, on behalf of residents of Montmartre in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and on behalf of residents of Rouleau in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Petitioners from all across the province have signed this petition, Mr. 
Speaker, and I take a great deal of pleasure in submitting this to the 
government for their attention. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have here a petition, Mr. Speaker, from more residents in 
Saskatchewan -- from Saskatoon I believe, from McIntosh Street and Elliott 
Street and 2nd Avenue North, Mr. Speaker.  And on their behalf and for the 
attention of the government, I take a great deal of pleasure in submitting 
this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have another petition, Mr. Speaker.  Again this petition 
has been signed by people from the city of Saskatoon; from 14th Avenue, 
from McIntosh Street, from 3rd Avenue, and many more signatures from 
McIntosh Street area. 
 
They have signed this petition and have asked us to present it to you.  And 
therefore I take pleasure today in presenting this petition, for the 
attention of the government, on behalf of these citizens. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, from residents of Saskatchewan 
who represent a number of different areas in the province of Saskatchewan.  
Some of these residents live in Glenavon.  Some live in Holdfast, 
Saskatchewan. Some live in Regina, Robinson Street in Regina, Garnet 
Street.  Some live in Pilot Butte, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Some live in 
Lipton.  And then there is Dryburgh Crescent in Regina.  There's a 
signature from Bankend; some from Pappas Crescent and another from Dryburgh 
Crescent in Regina.  And these citizens represent a number of different 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan, and on their behalf, Mr. 
Speaker, I present this petition today to the Legislative Assembly for the 
attention of the PC (Progressive Conservative) government. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, from more residents in the 
province of Saskatchewan -- from Regina, from Moose Jaw, from Summerberry, 
from Grenfell, from Hanley, and more signatures from Regina, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  All of these citizens have asked us to submit this petition to 
the Legislative Assembly, and I do so with pride, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, from a number of 
different communities in Saskatchewan.  There are people from Regina, one 
individual who lives on Tremaine Avenue.  There are people from Craven who 
have signed this petition.  More signatures from Regina, not all of them 
have indicated their specific address but some have: McSherry Crescent, 1st 
Avenue North, Gore Place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Cardinal Crescent, Harvey 
Street in the city of Regina, 5th Avenue in the city of Regina, Fulton 
Crescent in the city of Regina, Goulet Place, Michener Drive in the city of 
Regina, Daffodil Crescent in the city of Regina, and signatures from Craven 
as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And these residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan, these citizens and taxpayers, have asked us to table this 
petition in the Legislative Assembly today for the attention and 



 

 

consideration of the government.  And I take pleasure in doing so on behalf 
of these petitioners.  Thank you. 
 
I have here another petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from more people in 
Regina, Saskatchewan and other communities.  We have people here, residents 
of Saskatchewan, citizens of this province who live on Hanley Crescent in 
Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We have a citizen from Edgar Street in Regina, 
6th Avenue North in the city of Regina, Marshall Crescent in the city of 
Regina, Gore Place in the city of Regina, Read Avenue in the city of 
Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Irvin Street, 8th Avenue, Osborne Crescent, 
Tremaine Avenue, Connaught Street, Kleisinger Crescent, 5th Avenue, Athol 
Street, Bond Street -- all in the city of Regina.  We also have signature 
here from Canora.  We also have a signature here from Canora, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  And on behalf of this citizen of Canora and on behalf of all the 
residents of Regina who have signed this petition for the attention of the 
government, I take a great deal of pleasure in tabling this in the 
legislature today.  Thank you. 
 
I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition from residents across 
this province who have signed this petition for the attention of the 
government.  They are from communities such as Southey; from Regina, 
Academy Park Road in Regina; from Yellow Grass; from Retallack Street in 
Regina, and Sneddon Street in Regina, from Bauermeister in Regina, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, from Ottawa Street in Regina, Champ Crescent, McCarthy 
crescent.  There are signatures from Wynyard, Saskatchewan, in this 
petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and more signatures from Regina, specifically 
from Ingersoll Crescent, Kent Street, Argyle Street, and a signature from 
Regina Beach, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  These citizens have asked us to table 
this petition in the legislature for the attention of the PC government, 
and I take a great deal of pleasure on their behalf in tabling this 
petition today.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here another petition from communities in 
Saskatchewan by residents of the province of Saskatchewan.  They are from 
localities such as Southey in the province of Saskatchewan, from Regina, 
from Pilot Butte, and from Lumsden, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  These citizens 
have signed their name to this petition and are asking us to table it in 
the legislature today on their behalf, and I take a great deal of pleasure 
in doing so. 
 
I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition from communities in 
Saskatchewan, from people who live in communities throughout the province 
of Saskatchewan who have asked us to petition the government on their 
behalf and bring this matter to the government's attention.  They live in 
places such as Hanley, Saskatchewan; in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; Gardiner 
Avenue, Bell Crescent, Lakeshore Crescent, Cascade Street in Saskatoon, 
Lloyd Crescent, Gladmer Park, 7th Street East in Saskatoon, Edmond Heights, 
and Anderson Crescent and St. Patrick Avenue, and more citizens from the 
city of Saskatoon who have signed this petition.  Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I am very pleased on behalf of these individuals to table this petition for 
the attention of the PC government.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here yet another petition from a number of 



 

 

different places in Saskatchewan, from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, and I see 
that there is a signature from Outlook, Saskatchewan as well.  And they are 
from localities such as 105th Street West, Kirk Crescent, Prairie Avenue, 
Taylor Street East in Saskatoon, and McKercher Drive in Saskatoon, 
Highlands Crescent, 9th Street East, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Crow Crescent, 
Tennant Crescent, Willoughby Crescent, St. Andrew Avenue, and other 
residents from the city of Saskatoon who have signed this petition and who 
expect us to bring this petition to the attention of the government.  And I 
do so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on their behalf and I hope that the petition 
receives the consideration of the PC government. 
 
I have one last petition here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from residents of the 
city of Saskatoon again who have put their signatures to this petition in 
the hope that it would be brought to the attention of the government.  They 
represent areas such as Wollaston, 108th, McKercher Drive, Richmond 
Crescent, Charlebois Crescent, 3rd Street East, McKercher Drive, Cumberland 
Avenue, Broadbent Avenue, Badger Street, 10th Street, Trent Crescent, and a 
number of other areas in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And on 
behalf of these Saskatoon residents, citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan, I take a great deal of pleasure in tabling this petition for 
the attention and serious consideration of the PC government.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition on behalf of a number of 
Saskatchewan residents.  These Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker, are 
petitioning the government because of their concern about the provincial 
GST.  They believe that the provincial government does not have a mandate 
from the people of the province to impose this major tax increase, and they 
are petitioning the Assembly urging the provincial government to stop the 
provincial GST until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass 
judgement on it in a provincial election. 
 
I am very pleased to present these petitions on behalf of a number of my 
own constituents in the neighbourhoods of College Park and Greystone 
Heights in Saskatoon.  I also see that a resident in Saskatoon Nutana has 
signed this petition.  And on behalf of these residents, it's my honour to 
present it in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have another petition also signed by residents of Saskatoon, many of them 
living in Grosvenor Park neighbourhood, the Grosvenor Park neighbourhood in 
my constituency.  And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer and request of the 
legislature is the same as the last petition.  And on behalf of these 
residents it's my honour to present it in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a third petition, again signed by residents of 
Saskatoon with the same prayer.  This petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
signed by some 12 Saskatoon residents.  They reside on Main Street, Heise 
Crescent, Victoria Avenue, on 7th Street East, 8th Street East, Cooper 
Crescent, and Herman Avenue in my home city. 



 

 

 
And on behalf of these Saskatoon residents, it's my honour to present their 
petition to the Legislative Assembly in the hope that it will be favourably 
heard by the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition here, again with the same 
prayer, and this time signed by residents on the west side of Saskatoon.  I 
also see two signatures here from Heise Crescent, and a resident of Rabbit 
Lake who I assume was visiting in the city of Saskatoon has also signed 
this petition. 
 
And on behalf of these residents of the province it's my privilege to 
submit it to the Legislative Assembly in the hope that the government will 
give it serious consideration. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here a sixth petition signed by residents on 
both the east and the west side of the river in Saskatoon.  Once again, 
sir, it is with the same prayer asking the government to give favourable 
consideration to the views of these petitioners.  And it's my honour to 
present it to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here another petition, one that is different 
from the one that I've just been making reference to.  So with your 
permission I will read the prayer.  This one deals with the concerns that 
the undersigned residents have about the imposition of a tax on reading in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  The petitioners describe this as a tax on 
knowledge and information.  And they point out that it's the only one of 
its kind being levied by a province in Canada. 
 
The petitioners are urging the provincial government to reverse its 
decision to impose this unfair 7 per cent provincial tax on reading 
materials.  And the petitioners in this case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
largely from the Maple Creek area of the province.  I see 19 signatures 
here from Maple Creek; a resident of Robsart, Saskatchewan has also signed 
this petition.  And on behalf of these residents from south-western 
Saskatchewan, it's my pleasure to submit the petition to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have before me yet another petition also dealing with 
concern about the tax on reading.  This one, sir, is signed by residents of 
Estevan, Saskatchewan.  Almost all of the residents are from the Estevan 
riding but they include some 18 signatures from Estevan.  And a resident of 
Oxbow, Saskatchewan has signed this petition, sir, as well as three 
residents from Bienfait and a citizen from Regina.  On behalf of these 
Saskatchewan citizens, it's my privilege to submit their prayer to the 
Legislative Assembly in the hopes that it will be heard favourably. 
 
 DMr. Speaker, I have yet another petition with the same mandate, again 
signed by some 21 residents of Estevan, Saskatchewan in the Premier's 
riding, expressing their concerns about the government's action on the 
issue that I mentioned a moment ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, I have another petition, again on the 



 

 

same subject matter, this time signed by residents of McLeod Avenue and 
Ambassador Street, and five signatures here from Ambassador Street, and 
some 18 other signatures from Estevan, Saskatchewan, petitioning the 
Assembly with their concerns on the matter I made reference to a few 
moments ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I have another petition here, again on the same 
mandate, but this time, Mr. Speaker, it's signed by residents of Limerick, 
Saskatchewan.  I see here six signatures from Limerick. Several residents 
of Crane Valley have signed this petition.  There are two signatures from 
Coronach and some 10 signatures from Assiniboia, again expressing the same 
prayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have yet another petition on the concern I made reference to 
earlier.  This one, sir, is signed by some 19 residents of Assiniboia, 
Saskatchewan, and a resident of Limerick.  Again I think all of these 
petitions that I've presented in the last five minutes show the growing 
concern in southern Saskatchewan and in both the south-west and south-east 
corners of the province in opposition to the measure under consideration in 
the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here again with the same concern on the 
reading tax, signed by residents from Weyburn, Saskatchewan.  Some 16 
residents of Weyburn have signed this petition.  There are also signatures 
here from Lake Alma and from Lampman. 
 
And on behalf of these Saskatchewan residents it's my honour to present 
their concerns to the Assembly.  This is the only vehicle they have for 
making their voice directly heard, and I hope the government will be 
responsive to their concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition on the same subject matter.  This one 
is signed by some 20 Saskatchewan residents, including 12 residents from 
Weyburn.  I see here a signature from Lang, Saskatchewan; a couple of 
signatures from Midale, Saskatchewan; and a resident of Ceylon, 
Saskatchewan has signed this petition, sir.  And on behalf of these 
Saskatchewan residents it's indeed my pleasure to submit it to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have two other petitions here that I would like to present 
this afternoon, again on the same subject matter.  One is signatures from 
some 20 Saskatchewan residents from Weyburn.  And I think this afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker, I must have presented now over a hundred signatures from 
Weyburn alone expressing concern about the measure before us.  And these 
citizens of Weyburn have asked me on their behalf to submit their concerns 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased on behalf of residents from 
Willow Bunch, Saskatchewan; Midale, Saskatchewan; Glentworth, Saskatchewan; 
and 14 residents from Assiniboia, Saskatchewan, to present their concerns 
by way of a petition in opposition to this tax measure.  Thank you very 
much, sir. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to present a petition to the Assembly on behalf of a number of residents 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And the petitioners on the following 
petitions request the following prayer: 
 

 That we, the undersigned, support the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax On 
Reading in opposition to tax on books, magazines, and newspapers.  We 
believe that a tax on reading is a tax on knowledge and information, and 
is detrimental to our society.  Traditionally, books, magazines and 
newspapers in Canada have been exempt from sales taxes because Canadians 
have recognized the cultural, social, educational values of the written 
word.  The proposed provincial tax on reading will be the only one of its 
kind in Canada.  The Saskatchewan government's proposal to add a 7% 
provincial tax . . . 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order order!  Order. 
 
I'm having a little difficulty hearing the hon. member.  Secondly, I'm not 
just sure whether or not he's actually reading the prayer or the entire 
petition.  Sounds to me from here that it's the entire petition.  Perhaps 
you could clarify. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- No, Mr. Speaker, I'm reading the prayer, and I'll just 
finish off, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 The proposed provincial tax on reading will be the only one of its kind in 
Canada.  The Saskatchewan government's proposal to add a 7% provincial tax 
on top of the new 7% GST on books and periodicals will mean that readers 
in Saskatchewan will be amongst the highest taxed in the world. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to table this petition that I have in my hand 
here. And the petitioners are from a number of communities such as Ituna, 
Goodeve, Hubbard, and the community of Kamsack.  I now want to lay this 
petition on the Table. 
 
I now have another petition, Mr. Speaker, that I want to lay on the Table.  
And it is also signed by a number of petitioners in community, and mainly 
this petition here is from the community of Maple Creek.  And they are also 
opposed to the new PST.  I want to now lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I now have a number of other petitioners on a petition here, Mr. Speaker.  
The same applies.  They are petitioning the government to stop the new PST 
tax and they are from a number of communities in the province.  And I see 
that they come from such areas as Tompkins and Maple Creek.  I now want to 
lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, and it falls into the same 
category.  And it is signed by a number of petitioners from such areas as 
Prince Albert, and Meath Park, and I see Weirdale, Yellow Creek, and also 
there is petitioners on this petition from Candle Lake.  I now lay this one 
on the Table. 



 

 

 
I also want to lay the following petition on the Table here, Mr. Speaker.  
And the petitioners on here are from a number of areas also, mainly in the 
northern part of the province, and they come from such areas as Prince 
Albert, Meath Park, Crystal Springs.  I see Debden is on this one, 
Tweedsmuir, and Duck Lake.  I now lay this petition also on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here also, Mr. Speaker.  And it is also from the 
northern part of the province, from a number of petitioners, and also 
opposed to the provincial PST.  And they are showing their disapproval with 
this petition, Mr. Speaker.  And they come from such northern communities 
as Christopher Lake, Prince Albert, Waskesiu, Tisdale, and Big River, and 
Debden, Saskatchewan in northern Saskatchewan.  I lay this petition on the 
Table. 
 
I've another petition here, Mr. Speaker, I also want to lay on the Table, 
and it is also signed by a number of petitioners in northern Saskatchewan.  
And I see a large majority of them here are from the city of Prince Albert.  
There are also petitioners here from Parkside, Saskatchewan; and from Big 
River.  I now want to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to lay another petition on the Table.  And this one 
is also signed by a number of petitioners from different parts of the 
province such as Prince Albert and Regina and also from Big River.  I lay 
this petition on the Table also. 
 
Now want to lay another petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker, and this one 
here is also from the northern part of the province.  I see the majority of 
them are from the city of Prince Albert.  I now table this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now have another petition here and I see it's also from the 
northern part of Saskatchewan, mainly coming from the city of Prince 
Albert.  I see there's a large number of them from Cambridge Street in 
Prince Albert and Bradbrooke Drive in Yorkton.  And the rest of them are 
from Prince Albert.  I lay this petition on the Table also. 
 
Another petition here, Mr. Speaker, that I want to table, and this one is 
from another group of petitioners who are also opposed to the provincial 
PST.  And they come from Saskatoon, from Taylor Street, Cumberland Street.  
There's petitioners on here from Davidson; and there's Lake Crescent also 
in Saskatoon. And there's also petitioners on here from Meadow Lake and 
from Yorkton. 
 
I now want to table another petition, Mr. Speaker, with petitioners who are 
also opposed to the provincial GST tax or the PST as it's referred to.  And 
the majority of the citizens who are on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come 
from the city of Saskatoon.  I see Conn Avenue, McEown Avenue, I think, I 
believe it's Clearwater Drive, Louise Street, Sutherland, all from the city 
of Saskatoon.  I lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, I want to lay on the Table, and this 



 

 

is a petition that's from the northern part of our province.  I see 
petitioners here from Canora and Hafford and North Battleford and some of 
them from Saskatoon.  And I'll lay this on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now have another petition here that I want to also table and 
it comes from a number of places in Saskatchewan. And I see here we have 
Allan, Saskatchewan; Saskatoon, Regina, and Eastview.  That's in Saskatoon.  
I lay this on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another group of names here on the petition.  And the 
petitioners on this petition pretty well all come from the city of 
Saskatoon.  And I want to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, and it's pretty well all from 
the city of Saskatoon.  And I see they come from Yorkton Avenue and 
Delaronde Road and Cumberland Avenue, and this is all in the city of 
Saskatoon.  I want to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, and the petitioners here also 
are indicating their disapproval with the provincial PST.  And they are 
from Saskatoon.  Some of them are from rural route Saskatoon.  And I see 
Murphy Crescent and Salisbury Drive -- all in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now want to table another large group of names -- 
petitioners who are also opposed to the provincial PST.  And the 
petitioners on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from such areas as 
Colonsay, Leask, and a large number of them from the city of Saskatoon.  I 
now want to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, of petitioners who are also 
expressing their concern at the implementation of the new PST, and this 
group here are pretty well all from the city of Saskatoon.  I see Pinehouse 
Drive, Colony Street, Whitewood Crescent -- all in the city Saskatoon.  I 
now lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, with another 20-some names of 
petitioners who are also opposed, and they are all pretty well from the 
city of Saskatoon.  And I now want to lay this petition also on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker -- and now I've 
moved into the southern part of the province -- and the petitioners on this 
particular petition, also opposed to the PST, are mainly from the city of 
Regina, and I would also like to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here that I want to also table on 
behalf of a number of petitioners in Saskatchewan.  And they come from a 
number of communities such as White City, Craven, Bengough, McLean, and I 
see White City here again -- all in the southern part of our province.  And 
I lay this on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have only a few more petitions here that I want to table in 



 

 

the Assembly today.  And the petition that I have here now is from southern 
Saskatchewan, and I see from Sedley, Regina, Quinton, and I see Fort 
Qu'Appelle.  I now want to lay this on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to table another petition, and the one that I have 
here is back into northern Saskatchewan again.  And the petitioners on this 
particular petition, Mr. Speaker, are mainly from the city of Prince 
Albert.  And I see La Ronge, Crystal Springs, and Hudson Bay.  I now want 
to table this petition. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I only have a couple more petitions that I want to 
present here today.  One of the last ones that I have here today is also 
from the northern part of our province, and the large majority of them are 
from Prince Albert, and Weirdale, and I now want to . . . and Foxford I see 
on here, up in northern Saskatchewan.  So I now want to lay this on the 
Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- This is the last petition that I want to table today, Mr. 
Speaker, and the petitioners also on this petition are expressing their 
concern and opposition to the provincial PST.  And they come from such 
areas as Rouleau, Regina, and a number of other areas.  I see in the city 
of Regina and there's a couple of names here also from the city of Prince 
Albert, Mr. Speaker.  I now table this last petition.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much.  
It's my pleasure to join my colleagues today to present a number of 
petitions pursuant to rule 11, Mr. Speaker.  And the first one I want to 
present, Mr. Speaker, they are some 20 residents of . . . some from the 
constituency of Rosthern, Martensville -- from Martensville and Rosthern. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these people from Martensville and Rosthern are concerned 
that the government is attempting to impose a 7 per cent PST, GST, on the 
people of the province, and these petitioners are opposed to this tax.  
They ask that the government reverse its decision, indicating, as a 
petition does, that the Government of Saskatchewan has no mandate to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  I believe the hon. 
member is entering into the realm of debate and I would like to ask him to 
get on with the presentations. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I am proud then to present this petition on 
behalf of these constituents of the constituency of Rosthern.  And it's my 
pleasure and duty as a member of the legislature to present this petition, 
and I'm proud to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from my own riding in 
Saskatoon -- Saskatoon Eastview residents primarily.  And they as well, of 



 

 

course, are concerned about this tax and are asking that this decision be 
reversed.  And it's my privilege and indeed my responsibility as the MLA 
for Saskatoon Eastview to present these petition names on behalf of my 
constituents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, with the same intent, the same 
concern, and these are residents from the communities of Garrick, 
Saskatchewan; Smeaton, and most of the signatories are from the community 
of Choiceland.  And these residents are asking that the government reverse 
their decision on this tax as well.  I'm proud to present the petition on 
their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to have to ask the hon. member 
that in the presentation of his petitions he not continue to refer to the 
prayer, just simply to present his petitions as we had it.  The rule is, 
for the last while now, that the hon. member reads the prayer initially and 
then presents the petitions. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much for your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  With the 
same prayer, I'm proud to present this petition, Mr. Speaker, basically 
from rural Saskatchewan, the communities primarily of Kindersley and 
Avonlea, although there are some names from Saskatoon as well.  So I'm 
pleased to present this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer, I'm proud to present in this Assembly 
today petitions from citizens from the community of Rosetown, Saskatchewan.  
And there are also some residents of Saskatoon who have signed this 
petition as well.  And I recognize two or three of the names as being from 
my constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present today, again the same 
prayer, from citizens of Prince Albert.  There are 20 names here.  These 
citizens are all from Prince Albert, I guess, and I'm proud to present 
their concern on this day as well. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, from the communities of Goodsoil, 
Esterhazy, Kamsack, and Unity, and sort of another rural flavour to this 
petition, Mr. Speaker.  These petitioners are again asking that this 
petition be presented on their behalf and I am proud to do so today -- 20 
names, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have another petition here with 
the same prayer, and these petitioners are from the communities of Melfort, 
Saskatchewan; and Tisdale, and also from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  And I am 
proud to present this petition on their behalf as well. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker -- again the same prayer -- and this 
petition has representation from the communities of Leroy, Saskatchewan; 
Yorkton, Theodore, and North Battleford, and Loreburn, Mr. Speaker.  And 



 

 

I'm pleased to present the petition on behalf of these residents of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer -- some 20 names 
from residents who live in the communities of Davidson, Shaunavon, Regina, 
and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  I don't know where this originated but those 
are the four communities that have some representation. But 20 signatures, 
Mr. Speaker, and this represents about 200 names altogether that I have 
presented today regarding this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here from citizens of rural 
Saskatchewan, the communities of Hanley, Redberry, and also from Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker.  And I'm pleased to present this petition on their behalf and 
I'd like to do that at this time. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker.  This petition, with the same prayer, 
originated in North Battleford and bears the signatures of residents of 
North Battleford who are asking that this be presented on their behalf.  
And I note there is also a signature from a citizen who lives in Regina and 
a citizen who lives in Saskatoon -- but by and large, petitioners from 
North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here, and this petition is from 
residents who reside in the communities of Prairie River, Glaslyn, and 
Bruno, Saskatchewan.  And I'm pleased to present these 20 names from those 
communities on behalf of those rural citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have another petition here, again the same prayer, from residents of the 
communities of Delisle, Colonsay, and some names from Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker -- 20 petitioners who are concerned about the PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've got just three more petitions, Mr. Speaker, again the 
same prayer.  This petition is from citizens of the communities of Delisle, 
North Battleford, and Patuanak in northern Saskatchewan.  So I'm proud to 
present the petition on behalf of those citizens again from rural and 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And another petition I have here on behalf of 20 Saskatchewan residents, 
the same prayer.  These petitioners live in the communities of Humboldt, 
Davidson, and Aberdeen and Avalon, one person from Avalon, and three or 
four from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm proud and honoured to present 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
The last petition that I will present today, Mr. Speaker, again is from my 
own community of Saskatoon, and this one is from the constituency of 
Saskatoon Eastview.  This represents, as far as I am aware, there are 7,600 
names of residents of Saskatoon Eastview, Mr. Speaker, who have put their 
name to this petition.  This is from my constituency, some 7,600 people, 
and I'm pleased to present this petition on behalf of residents of 
Saskatoon and proud to have presented many of those 7,600 signatories from 
my constituency of Saskatoon Eastview.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, of course pursuant to 
rule 11, I join with other of my legislative colleagues this afternoon in 
presenting, laying on the Table of this legislature further petitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like the thousands of others of those names which have been 
presented here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, this petition is a petition in 
protest of this government's intention to place upon the people of 
Saskatchewan the single largest tax increase in this province's history 
since 1905. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners pray that your Honourable Assembly may be 
pleased to urge the provincial government opposite to reverse its decision 
to impose this unfair tax.  These people say the government of this day has 
no mandate to impose this tax on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the first petition that I wish to lay on the 
Table this afternoon, I am very pleased to be laying on the Table because 
each of those who have signed this petition make their home in the 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, like the thousands of others from Moose Jaw 
who have petitioned this legislature, these citizens come from all corners 
of the city of Moose Jaw, from Aster Crescent, Connaught Street, Regal 
Crescent, Francis, General Crescent, Wood Lily Drive, Ominica Street, 1st 
Avenue North, Edelweiss Crescent, Admiral Crescent, General Crescent, 
Vaughan Street, Mr. Speaker, Simcoe Street, Queen Crescent, from every 
corner of the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's my privilege and responsibility to present this petition, to lay it on 
the Table of the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, under the same prayer which I identified 
earlier, I present this petition to the House, of these residents who 
almost to a one, Mr. Speaker, make their home I believe in the city of 
Saskatoon.  Many of them living on Preston Avenue, one address from Jan 
Crescent, which I believe is in Saskatoon.  There is at least one exception 
on this petition, Mr. Speaker, a resident of the community of Osler has 
signed this petition. 
 
It's my privilege and responsibility to lay this petition on the Table of 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, from a community with a unique name in our 
province, from the community of Eastend, Mr. Speaker, which I believe is in 



 

 

the constituency of Shaunavon on the west side of the province.  With one 
exception and that exception is a resident of the community of Shaunavon, 
everyone of the signatures on this petition are from the community of 
Eastend, Mr. Speaker, 19 petitioners from Eastend,  
 DSaskatchewan, one petitioner from the community of Shaunavon.  On behalf 
of these residents of Eastend and Shaunavon, it's my privilege to present 
this petition to the legislature in hopes that the government of the day 
will pay serious attention to their concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the petitioners on this petition, again under 
the same prayer, indicate that these petitioners are from both rural and 
urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  This petition has been signed by a number 
of residents of the city of Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, the city of 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and the community of Morse, Mr. Speaker, the 
community of Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker, from both rural and from urban 
Saskatchewan.  Saskatchewan residents are uniting in signing this petition.  
It's my responsibility, Mr. Speaker, as a member of this House to present 
this petition, to lay it on the Table of the Legislative Assembly this 
afternoon.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, with the thousands of those signatures which 
have come from the community represented by the member from Moose Jaw North 
and myself, yet another full petition, Mr. Speaker, from the city of Moose 
Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, as I review the names who have signed this petition from 
the city of Moose Jaw, I see several names that I recognize, Mr. Speaker.  
Again these signatories of this petition represent young people, represent 
senior citizens, represent working people, professional people, Mr. 
Speaker, these signatures from the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, as I lay this petition on the Table, again 
under the same prayer to this Legislative Assembly, again with two 
exceptions, these signatories all make their home in the beautiful city of 
Swift Current.  Mr. Speaker, some of the signatures here live in 
communities not far from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker.  I see someone here 
from Shaunavon, I see someone here from Vanguard, Saskatchewan, all 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan who have affixed their signatures 
to this petition under the prayer that I identified at the outset.  Mr. 
Speaker, it's my privilege and responsibility as a member of this House on 
behalf of these residents of Saskatchewan to lay this petition on the 
Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 20 signatures on this petition.  Each of these 
signatories have indicated their name in print so it's clear to their 
intention to sign.  And they have each indicated, every one of these, Mr. 
Speaker, that they make their home in the community of Stewart Valley, Mr. 
Speaker, 20 petitioners from the community of Stewart Valley who have 
signed a petition under the prayer which I identified at the beginning of 



 

 

my remarks.  Mr. Speaker, I lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from a community of which I am familiar, south of the city of 
Moose Jaw, 20 further petitioners primarily from the community of Avonlea.  
Mr. Speaker, in addition to Avonlea, one petitioner who makes her home in 
the community, the village of Truax and two petitioners who make their home 
in Regina.  Mr. Speaker, all residents of the province of Saskatchewan, 
petitioning as is their democratic right, their legislature.  It's my 
privilege as a member of this House to present this petition to lay it on 
the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, again primarily from the community of Avonlea, 
but also from the communities of Kayville and Truax and Hearne, Mr. 
Speaker, communities again south of the city that I am privileged to 
represent -- 20 more signatures who have petitioned residents of the 
province, who've petitioned this legislature under the prayer which I 
identified at the outset, Mr. Speaker.  And with my gratitude to the page, 
I table this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatories on this petition, Mr. Speaker, you will be 
interested to know I believe all make their home here in the city of 
Regina,  the capital city of the province, with one exception, Mr. Speaker, 
someone who makes his home in the community of Balgonie.  Mr. Speaker, they 
live in all parts of the city as I know Regina.  Pasqua Street, 
Elphinstone, Elliott Street, Hosie Place -- Hosie Place of Regina.  Hosie 
Place is in the south end of Regina, Mr. Speaker.  I'm absolutely delighted 
to be laying this petition on the Table this afternoon from these residents 
of the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, this next petition with 20 further signatures 
will bring a total of 220 signatures that I have laid on the Table already 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of these again, these petitioners are from the city of 
Regina, with some addresses in Regina that I don't recognize.  But clearly, 
Garnet Street, Hamilton Street, those are addresses I do recognize as 
Regina, with one signature, Mr. Speaker, from a community just to the east 
of Regina -- White City.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these 20 residents of 
our province, it's my privilege and responsibility to present their names 
in petition in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I'm not mistaken, Litzenberger is an address here in the 
city of Regina, -- a crescent; I'm informed by a member opposite that it's 
a crescent here in Regina.  There are also other Regina addresses on this 
petition, Mr. Speaker: Osler Street, Sweeney Street -- I believe that's 
Regina -- Arthur, McVeety Drive, Mr. Speaker.  Others have simply indicated 
that their community is the city of Regina, the capital city of our 



 

 

province.  Twenty further names in petition to the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, and it's my privilege and responsibility to present this petition 
on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at this petition I have no difficulty recognizing 
where it's from, Mr. Speaker.  Most if not all of the signatures to this 
petition have affixed their home addresses, Mr. Speaker, and I note that 
each one of these signatories live in the city of Moose Jaw.  Each and 
every one of them live in the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, and again they come from every part of the 
city of Moose Jaw.  Stadacona Street, Hochelaga Street, Monk Avenue, Grace, 
Marquis Avenue, Francis Street, Willow, Elgin Hall.  Many of these in the 
constituency of Moose Jaw North, Mr. Speaker.  Laurier Street, Vaughan 
Street, and Holdsworth, Mr. Speaker.  Another 20 signatures from the city 
that I am privileged, along with the member from Moose Jaw North, to 
represent, Mr. Speaker, petitioning their legislature.  I lay this on the 
Table, Mr. Speaker, with the sincere hope that government members opposite 
will pay attention to the concerns of these residents of the city of Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And, Mr. Speaker, as I look at this petition, again the 
street names tell me without exception that these two are residents of the 
city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  And again, Mr. Speaker, I recognize some 
of the names, some of those who have affixed their signature, Mr. Speaker, 
to the petition.  And again, Mr. Speaker, I know that these names represent 
people from all walks of life and from all ages and from every part of our 
city, Mr. Speaker, from Normandy Drive on the north side, Smith Street on 
the south side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege and a responsibility as a member from the 
city of Moose Jaw, and it's my delight to be presenting these signatures to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recognize this petition also as coming from the city of 
Moose Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, I recognize one of my neighbour's names on this 
petition.  This is from Valleyview Drive, not far from where I call home in 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  But again, not just from Valleyview Drive but from 
every part of the city, Mr. Speaker, from Vaughan Street, Athabasca Street, 
Caribou Street, Wood Lily, Albert Street -- Albert Street, Moose Jaw that 
is, Mr. Speaker.  With one exception, Mr. Speaker, someone who makes her 
home in the district surrounding Moose Jaw but would certainly call Moose 
Jaw her home, I know that, but who lives and farms just outside of Moose 
Jaw, Mr. Speaker, who would actually live in the constituency of Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Again someone here from Warner, from Hall Street, Carleton, Henleaze, Hall 
Street, from every corner of the city of Moose Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, as one of 
the MLAs from that community, it's my privilege to present this petition to 



 

 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining the thousands of others from the city of Moose Jaw who 
have petitioned this legislature, yet another 14 signatures, Mr. Speaker, 
again from every corner of the city of Moose Jaw.  Without exception these 
signatories live in the city of Moose Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, Grey Street, 
Hawthorne Crescent, Athabasca West, 1st North East, Spadina, Queen 
Crescent, Simpson Avenue, Vaughan Street, Mr. Speaker, all from the 
beautiful city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  And it's my responsibility and 
privilege to present their signatures here to the Table of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I have asked hon. members in the past not to waste 
the time of the House by signing their petitions.  If you're unable to 
present your petitions without using up the time of the House signing them, 
I will have to move to the next member. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your guidance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I view this petition, I believe it is the first time I have 
had the opportunity to present a petition in the legislature under the 
prayer which I identified at the start from residents, sir, of Montreal 
Lake, Saskatchewan -- from Montreal Lake, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But outside of Montreal Lake there are also signatures here from Spruce 
Home, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; from Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker; and from 
Big River, Mr. Speaker -- communities in the beautiful North of 
Saskatchewan.  And it's my privilege on behalf of these residents of 
Saskatchewan to lay their petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that each of the 20 signatories on this petition, Mr. 
Speaker, all without exception . . . no, sorry, Mr. Speaker, with one 
exception, make their home in the community of Ogema.  So we've gone from 
the north to the south of Saskatchewan.  All of these from the community of 
Ogema, with one exception, and this signatory makes her home in the 
constituency, in the community of Estevan, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry, there is one other exception on this petition -- a 
signatory who is from Tisdale, Saskatchewan.  So a fair distance away from 
Estevan, but Tisdale, Estevan, and the community of Ogema, Mr. Speaker.  I 
am privileged to lay these petitioners' signatures on the Table of the 
Legislative Assembly.  Thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I review the signatures on this petition, I believe they 
are all from the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, from McDonald Street, from 
Minto Street, which I believe is here in Regina, Montague Street which I 
know is in Regina, Horace Street here in Regina.  Mr. Speaker, with many, 
many others from this community of Regina who have signed petitions, I add 
these signatories to those from this city who are petitioning the 
legislature. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have two other petitions to present this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, two others of the many more that I have but I would like to 
present two others today.  And, Mr. Speaker, interestingly, both of these 
petitions have been completely filled by residents of the community of Fox 
Valley, Mr. Speaker, the community of Fox Valley with one or two 
exceptions, one from Richmound, Mr. Speaker.  And so on behalf of these 
residents of Fox Valley and the one from Richmound, Mr. Speaker, it's my 
privilege and responsibility to present this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the last petition I would like to present this 
afternoon bringing, Mr. Speaker, to a total of 400 or so petitioners, 
signatories whose names I have laid on the Table this day -- 400 in the 
short while that I have been presenting petitions today.  Again another 
petition from the residents of Fox Valley, Mr. Speaker, who with the 400 or 
so others who I've presented today, protest this government's decision to 
impose a very unfair tax.  It's my privilege to present this petition, Mr. 
Speaker.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I see 
it's nearing 5 o'clock, but I wanted to rise today to present a petition on 
behalf of some residents of the constituency of Prince Albert, my 
colleague, the member from Prince Albert. 
 
And they are, sir, urging that this government stop the provincial goods 
and services tax and hold back that legislation until the people of 
Saskatchewan have had an opportunity to pass judgement on that particular 
Bill, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I know the member from Moose Jaw North is 
anxious to present his petitions, so I will hold the thousands that I have 
before me for another day and yield the floor to the member from Moose Jaw 
North.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, pursuant to 
rule 11, it's my honour to join my colleagues in the presentation of 
petitions this afternoon.  The petition that I wish to present, Mr. 
Speaker, is the same . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order.  Order.  It seems that there 
are a good number of people anxious to submit petitions.  I would like the 
hon. member to . . . I ask the hon. members to give the member from Moose 
Jaw North . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I notice with interest 
that there are members eager to get into this on both sides of the floor. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the petition I wish to present today is from people who 
are calling for this provincial government to withdraw its unfair 
legislation to introduce the provincial goods and services tax, and to seek 
the mandate that it ought to have in order to introduce such a tax by 
calling a provincial election. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Very clearly, Mr. Speaker, they are indicating that a mandate 
needs to be sought in order to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member is entering debate and he's 
out of order. And it being 5 o'clock the House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


