





























































Hansard: April 22, 1991


 

 

April 22/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to the members of this legislature through you, 
Mr. Speaker, five special people in the west gallery.  My wife Alma is up 
there for . . . to come and listen to that excellent document going to be 
delivered later on this day by the Minister of Finance. 
 
And I further would like to introduce to you Mrs. Helen Teichroeb, Mrs. 
Anne Friesen, Mrs. Tina Sawatzky, and Mrs. Rita Guenther.  Those last four 
mentioned happen to be my sisters and I would appreciate it if all members 
of the legislature could give them a warm Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Funding for Universities 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Education and 
it concerns university funding or lack of university funding by your 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am sure you are well aware that the University of Regina 
has recently announced a 17 per cent increase again, once again, on student 
university tuition fees.  But even worse, Mr. Speaker, the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) has announced a 40 per cent increase in 
tuition fees in some of their programs and that it will lay off 85 staff 
this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, the future of young people is at stake and is adversely being 
affected by the lack of commitment by your government to university 
education. 
 
Mr. Minister, when can the students and the universities of this province 
expect adequate funding from your government so that tuition fees do not 
have to increase again, so that universities don't have to cut programs, 
and finally, Mr. Minister, so that enrolment quotas can be eliminated?  
When will you make that commitment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is that 
we have increased the operating grants to the universities this year by 
some 3.5 per cent, and I think that everyone feels that under their present 
economic circumstances, that that is a fair increase. 



 

 

 
I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that for each and every year that this 
party has been in power, that we have increased the operating grant to the 
universities.  We fully understand that there is responsibility on the part 
of the students to pay a fair share of the costs of their education. 
 
I think that if you take a look at the tuition fees that are being paid by 
our students here in Saskatchewan, that they're on a par with what students 
in other provinces are paying.  And, Mr. Speaker, we would certainly like 
to give more money to the universities, but under the present circumstances 
we feel that a 3.5 per cent increase is fair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- A new question to the minister. Mr. Minister, the recent 
Provincial Auditor's report clearly indicates that you had much more than 
3.5 per cent in polling, in advertising, in patronage jobs, in ministerial 
travel -- much more than 3.5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to remind you also that tuition fees here in 
Saskatchewan are some of the highest in all of western Canada. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Minister, you have to be reminded that your operating funding, 
your operating funding for universities is one of the lowest in all of 
Canada -- one of the lowest. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm asking you again: when are you going to have any 
influence at all in that government to get adequate funding for our 
universities so that our university students don't have to go to another 
province in order to get their education.  They want it here, Mr. Minister.  
We need a commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, to suggest that the fees that the 
students here in Saskatchewan are paying are far out of line with other 
western universities is inaccurate.  When he suggests that per student, 
that we're paying less here than any other university in Canada, I think 
that the member opposite likes to use his own sets of figures, figures that 
we would not use. 
 
And at the same time, for him to suggest that we have a lot of our students 
that are leaving this province to go to university elsewhere -- that is not 
accurate either, Mr. Speaker.  The fact is that we do have some students 
who go to universities in other provinces because they want to take 
specialized courses that are not offered here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear the member opposite talking about changes that we need 
to be making here.  We haven't to this point in time seen any plan, any 
changes, that that party would bring into being if they in fact were the 
government. 
 
They talk about advertising.  Does the member opposite think then that 



 

 

there shouldn't be any advertising or any information going out with regard 
to core curriculum, with regard to the student loan plan, and that sort of 
thing?  He makes these comments but does not have any suggestions at all as 
to changes that could be actually taking place. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier.  Mr. 
Premier, I have before me a letter dated October 15, 1987, and it concerns 
the funding of the new agricultural building.  And in it you state the 
following: 
 

 I would like to confirm that the Government of Saskatchewan, through its 
Department of Advanced Education, has explored fully the operating costs 
of this new building in consultation with the university and that 
sufficient funds will be provided in the grants to the university to 
properly operate and maintain the facility. 

 
Mr. Premier, the university wants to know if this is another one of your 
broken promises, or are you going to stand by that commitment and make 
another $2.5 million available to the U of S in order to pay for the 
increased costs of the new agricultural building.  Are you going to make 
that commitment, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm really pleased that the member 
opposite has raised the new College of Agriculture Building issue because I 
would point out that this is a project that had been asked for, for some 25 
years which that party over there failed to do anything about. 
 
I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that this government has built many 
major projects on the University of Saskatchewan campus during the last 
nine years.  And I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that in each case, 
when one of those new buildings was opened, additional money was not 
provided for the operating of those new buildings. 
 
I have also, Mr. Speaker, seen all of the correspondence with regard to the 
College of Agriculture Building.  There has never been any solid indication 
given that there would be increased funding as far as the operation was 
concerned.  And I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that this year we are 
allowing the University of Saskatchewan some $3.9 million in their 
operating grant.  And the feeling is that from that they can find the $1.5 
million dollars that is needed to operate that new building this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Premier, I direct my question to the Premier again.  Mr. 
Premier, do you think it is fair to the U of S when you make a commitment 
that you will provide adequate funds for the operating cost of the 
university in the agricultural sector -- you said that you would make 
adequate funds available -- do you think, Mr. Premier, that it is fair for 
you to ask the U of S to have only increases of 1.5 per cent and provide 
all the programs available, and you will not stand by your commitment? 
 



 

 

Mr. Premier, does your commitment not mean anything at all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Premier, I would point out to you and to the 
members opposite again that it was this government that built the new 
College of Agriculture Building, a building that was very, very badly 
needed.  There have been many discussions that have gone on with the 
President of the University of Saskatchewan, and those discussions will 
continue. 
 
But the fact is that the University of Saskatchewan is receiving an 
additional $3.9 million this year in their operating grant.  The feeling is 
that from that they can use $1.5 million of that for the operation of the 
new college building for this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Provincial Funding for Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health.  Mr. 
Speaker, I have just met with the nurses outside, and I must say, Mr. 
Minister, that your absence was noted.  Mr. Speaker, the nurses are saying 
that the health care system in this province is facing a crisis because of 
the government's inability to organize and co-ordinate health care services 
in the province.  On the one hand, they pour millions into building 
facilities, and on the other hand they close hospital beds and cut staff, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hospitals in four Saskatchewan cities -- Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and 
Yorkton -- have announced the closure of approximately 279 care beds in the 
past weeks.  Dr. Kuling, the new president of the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association) notes that there is uncertainty with respect to the 
availability of services for people with heart pains, women with lumps on 
their breasts, or elderly stroke victims who can't be treated at home.  For 
these people, he says, I'm not sure what lies ahead.  And that's a sad 
commentary, Mr. Minister, on your ability to deliver health care services 
in the province. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is that the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses has 
asked that the government undertake a full inquiry into the issue of 
hospital funding in this province.  Mr. Minister, are you prepared to hold 
such an inquiry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises questions of a 
demonstration by nurses here in front of the Legislative Building today, 
obviously a very significant part of collective bargaining that is now 
going on.  Collective bargaining is going on, as I think all citizens of 
the province will know, between the nurses and the hospital associations of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know if the hon. member, on that particular point, if 
the hon. member is suggesting that I as Minister of Health should inject 
myself into that collective bargaining process, or if I should not.  I'd be 
interested in hearing what her position is on that. 
 
As it relates to the choices made in developing this year's budget and 
going back to February when the Minister of Finance announced three and a 
half per cent increases for the institutional side of the health care 
sector -- this being hospitals and special care homes -- we were very clear 
with those homes and with those hospitals at the time -- and in February --  
and very up front in telling them the reason for the announcement early was 
because they would need to develop their individual plans within their 
individual institutions for the upcoming year. 
 
They have done that.  There are some beds that are closing in some of the 
hospitals, yes, Mr. Speaker.  They have done a good job of their planning.  
Three and a half per cent increase to those institutions in a time when the 
changing emphasis in health care must go from institutional care to 
community-based care, and you'll see more of that in the budget later this 
day.  So, Mr. Speaker, all I can say to the hon. member who likes to 
grandstand . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, my question to you was: will you hold an 
inquiry into a . . . a full inquiry into the issue of hospital funding in 
the province, yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- What the union of nurses requested in a letter to me 
was that I inquire into, and they cited a section of the Act, and that 
section provides for a . . . not a full public inquiry in the sense that 
the hon. member I believe is referring to, and perhaps the nurses would 
refer to, but that involves the Minister of Health having responsibility 
for the delivery of health care in its broadest sense across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have taken that responsibility seriously in the amount of 
money that we have allocated to the institutional care across the province.  
We have done that, Mr. Speaker.  That's an ongoing process for the 
Department of Health officials, inquiring into the availability of funds, 
if those funds are appropriate.  All of that is going on, on an ongoing 
basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, that's pure rhetoric on the part of the 
minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- It's obvious, it's obvious he doesn't want to conduct a full 
inquiry because he knows he'll be very uncomfortable with the findings. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, we know that there are other hospitals which will soon 
announce bed closures.  We know that Pioneer Village in Regina has closed 
60 beds and that other care homes will make similar announcements in the 
near future. 
 
Your government, Mr. Minister, had choices.  You could have done your duty 
to health care or you could continue wasting taxpayers' dollars on 
sweetheart deals to Cargill, on self-serving advertising to prop up your 
image in health care, on patronage and perks and on political expediency. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is how many sick and elderly people will 
have to be denied care before you realize that you made the wrong choices?  
How many beds and jobs must we lose, Mr. Minister, before your government 
realizes it's made the wrong choices? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has said the 
government has choices.  The hon. member has said that there are choices, 
and I have reiterated that.  The government has choices and must make 
choices during the period of time of fiscal restraint and the period of 
time that our economy . . . that is real for everyone except the socialist 
members on the opposite side of the House here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member says, conduct an inquiry.  Mr. Speaker, the same 
member at the time of the commissioning of the Murray report to look into 
all of health care in this province, a blueprint for that, was against that 
inquiry or that report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatoon Health Services Authority was put in place 
to look in a rational way, in a reasoned way at the three hospitals in 
Saskatoon and broaden that to delivery of full health care beyond the 
institutional sector in Saskatoon, the hon. member was very silent about 
that and in fact was in the background against that process as well.  
That's an inquiry that is reasonable, done by the Department of Health and 
by this minister. 
 
The Atkinson report as it relates to hospitals in Regina and the role of 
each of those hospitals and their relationship with each other -- all of 
those, Mr. Speaker, were done in a reasoned way and an ongoing basis by 
this department because those are choices we made knowing the reality of 
the health care system and the reality of the economy of this province.  
Mr. Speaker, those choices . . . and I say to the hon. member, she has a 
choice as well.  What is it?  What's the choice?  Is it 20 per cent?  Is it 
25 per cent?  Is it 15 per cent?  Is it 8 per cent?  What is it, Mr. 
Speaker?  Let her stand and say so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, what the nurses are talking about is an inquiry 
that takes action and where action will be implemented, not an inquiry like 
the Murray Commission that's sitting on the shelf a year later and 



 

 

collecting dust, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, the bed closures in the four cities will mean 
the loss of more than 400 health care jobs.  Considering that in 1985 there 
were 448,000 people employed in Saskatchewan and in 1990 there were 
449,000, we can see that your government has been able to create a total of 
1,000 new jobs in five years.  And now almost half of those are being lost 
in the health care area. 
 
Who knows what the total will be when we hear from all of rural 
Saskatchewan with respect to closures, Mr. Minister.  Why should 
Saskatchewan people believe you when you promise to move thousands of jobs 
to smaller communities, when your policies cut the jobs that already exist 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member once again, as I have 
outlined, when we have developed plans which are long range . . . and 
that's what's been going on.  And all of those . . . and the members 
opposite even now, even now the hon. members on the opposite side, because 
they're into one of their days when they think they've got their teeth into 
a mediscare issue.  Well, Mr. Speaker, all I say to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Order, order.  I can see that 
there are a great number of people who'd like to answer the question but 
the Minister of Health has been asked to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has been against -- all 
through a number of years now, and the record will show, has been against . 
. . Each time there's been an attempt.  Each time there's been a plan put 
forward, and all of these things that I mentioned in an earlier answer are 
part of an overriding plan.  That's true in a very significant enterprise 
in this province, the health care system.  Very complex and changing, 
changing significantly, Mr. Speaker, despite what the hon. member says, 
despite the lack of plans that they have, despite whatever . . . 
(inaudible) . . . will come for.  Mr. Speaker, this system is changing here 
and across Canada.  There's no question that's true.  The things that I've 
outlined in the earlier answer speak to that change, Mr. Speaker; you bet 
they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Annual Report of SPC 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation.  Now, Mr. Minister, the annual report, this glossy document 
which you tabled late Friday, shows some interesting numbers.  In fact a 
quick look at those numbers reveal why it is that your government went out 
of its way to table this annual report under the conditions of the least 
possible scrutiny. 
 



 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, given that the company, SPC (Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation), made a profit of $118 million last year, why did your 
government find it acceptable to strip a dividend of $291 million?  Is that 
your idea of a business-like approach to SaskPower, or are you simply 
robbing Peter to pay Nancy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, for the hon. member, the 
critic of the Power Corporation on the NDP (New Democratic Party) benches 
to suggest that the Sask Power Corporation under present management has not 
been operating in a business-like and reasoned way is almost laughable, Mr. 
Speaker.  It is.  It's laughable and the record shows that it's . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
As it relates to the tabling of the document, Mr. Speaker, which way do 
they want?  They've said you've tabled the document in a way in which they 
wouldn't be able to scrutinize it or whatever.  I can't remember just 
exactly what he's saying, what he's talking about.  On the other hand 
they've been running around the province saying, open the books and put the 
reports out and so on.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the books were put on the table.  
The hon. members can look at the reports if they would like, and I'm glad 
to see that the hon. member is reading the report.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  A new question to the same minister, 
Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you've said that you're operating SaskPower in 
a business-like manner.  I agree, you're operating it in a PC (Progressive 
Conservative) business-like manner, because once again those numbers 
revealed that we have a mounting debt problem.  That's the kind of 
business, Mr. Minister. 
 
That report pointed out that the Power Corporation's debt last year 
increased by some 288 million, while you stripped the dividend into the 
Consolidated Fund in the amount of 291 million.  In essence, Mr. Minister, 
SaskPower's debts would have declined this year, not increased, had you not 
taken out that dividend. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question is that given that the people of 
Saskatchewan know what you're doing with the money -- that you're 
transferring it from the Crown corporation into general revenues so that it 
will go straight into the black hole of waste and mismanagement which you 
characterize as a business-like approach -- would you tell the people of 
Saskatchewan by what right, Mr. Minister, do you have to rape, rob, and 
pillage arguably the most important Crown corporation in this the last year 
of your sorry mandate? 
 
Mr. Speaker, tell us all that. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The operation of Saskatchewan Power Corporation under 
this administration, Mr. Speaker, will stand up to anything ever presented 
by members who belong to that party.  Mr. Speaker, SaskPower Corporation is 



 

 

a profitable and well-managed corporation under this administration and the 
record is there to show it. 
 
There are no rate increases, Mr. Speaker, in the last year; no rate 
increases in the coming year, Mr. Speaker, and that's been announced to the 
public of the province.  Mr. Speaker, manufacturing and processing, a very 
important aspect of economic development and diversification in this 
province, enhanced by Saskatchewan Power who finally, under this 
administration, recognizes the need for diversification and for 
manufacturing and process in the province.  That recognition in SaskPower, 
The way that SaskPower has managed its affairs under this administration, 
Mr. Speaker, speaks very well for itself, and the record is there to show 
it regardless of what the hon. member from Rosemont might say here or 
anywhere else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  A new question to the same minister.  
May I begin by prefacing my remarks, Mr. Minister, that when we have an 
opportunity in the Crown Corporations Committee, we will see in fact 
precisely how the books of SaskPower are balanced and what part of those 
books were jiggled.  But that's not my question, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, on page 22 of this finely printed glossy report, there is a 
brief mention of the economic performance of Saskatchewan Energy for the 
year 1989, but there are no corroborating documents.  Mr. Minister, you did 
not make the 1989 annual report of SaskEnergy available, and you've not 
made the 1990 annual report of SaskEnergy available.  Mr. Minister, so much 
for open and accountable government from your side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- My question, Mr. Minister, to you is this.  If you're going 
to make claims like this, as you've made on page 22 in this annual report, 
don't you think that you and your government have an obligation to make 
available the annual reports of SaskEnergy so that you can back up your 
claims and so that the people of Saskatchewan can scrutinize those claims 
and put it in the proper perspective.  Won't you open the books of 
SaskEnergy, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, in all of that there may have been a 
question.  But I would say to the hon. member, picking up on what he had 
said in his earliest remarks in that last question, were that he looks 
forward to scrutiny of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in Crown 
Corporations Committee.  Mr. Speaker, so do I. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, a very short and succinct question to that 
minister.  Mr. Minister, we've heard a lot of political rhetoric out of you 
today.  Will you table the annual reports of SaskEnergy for 1989 and 1990?  



 

 

And if you won't, will you tell the people of Saskatchewan precisely what 
it is you're hiding?  What kind of jiggery-pokery . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- What kind of financial jiggery-pokery are you guys up to now, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, to reassure the hon. member, the 
government is hiding nothing -- we are hiding nothing.  Make it very clear. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has said, as I said earlier, we'll 
discuss all of this in the Crown Corporations Committee, and I'll look 
forward to that day.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Earth Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  This afternoon I 
would like to make a brief statement respecting Earth Day, and at this time 
I'd like to provide the opposition with a summary of my brief comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is Earth Day, and this is a day in which people all over 
the world are joining together in recognition that the planet we live on is 
our planet to manage.  The responsibility for a healthy environment does 
indeed belong to each and every one of our citizens.  Governments at all 
levels, communities, businesses, institutions, and individuals must all 
work together and we must create partnerships for action. 
 
And that responsibility, Mr. Speaker, falls on people of all assorted ages.  
And I am very encouraged to see the young people of Saskatchewan who are 
acting as leaders in environmental activities on this Earth Day.  School 
projects, community activities, individual actions -- hardly a day goes by 
in which you don't open a newspaper and read about young people who are 
taking real action on our environment.  These young people I feel, Mr. 
Speaker, are an inspiration to all of us in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that this government has also been active and 
committed in its handling of environmental matters.  A few days ago I 
announced a review of some five proposed uranium mines, a review that is 
ground-breaking in Saskatchewan, a review that is the first time federal 
and provincial governments in the province have worked together, a first 
assessment of such a large scale, the first assessment that will deal with 
cumulative effects of such proponents, of such proposals. 
 
In the month before, Mr. Speaker, we've introduced many other initiatives: 
blue box pilot projects in the cities of Lloydminster and, as well, Swift 
Current; a land-use strategy for The Great Sand Hills in the south-western 



 

 

part of the province; the second year of a third-year agricultural chemical 
collection program -- 30 tonnes of dangerous unused chemicals collected 
around rural Saskatchewan; new publications and reading materials such as 
the recycling directory that I have distributed as early as today, Mr. 
Speaker, where citizens all across the province can find out where, how, 
what you may or may not recycle in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that that directory will be of benefit to people all 
over this province.  I invite the opposition to read and research and 
review that publication as well as all of the other educational 
publications that we have sent to our people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I ask the opposition to join with the government on this Earth Day to 
recognize the activities and encourage all Saskatchewan citizens to join in 
those activities. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the members of 
the opposition, I want to say we are certainly most happy to join with all 
of those people inside the legislature and outside of the legislature who 
are recognizing Earth Day today. 
 
 DI want to say that and also at the same time say, Mr. Speaker, that we 
also on this side of the House want to reiterate what we have been saying 
for years to the members opposite, and that is that it's not enough to 
simply recognize these events, whether they're pitch-in weeks or earth 
days, on the days in which this is happening.  It is more important to make 
sure that this kind of thing continues 365 days out of every year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And it takes commitment on the part of government of 
any political party, no matter where the governments are and what 
jurisdiction, to make sure that that happens.  We recognize the important 
role that individuals have played in dealing with the questions of the 
environment.  I think the public, individuals, from school children to 
university students to people living in communities and their homes, have 
actually been ahead of the government of the day when it comes to 
environmental protection, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just bring to your example . . . for your example to your attention, the 
school children and the teacher at Chaplin, Saskatchewan who established, 
Mr. Speaker, a blue box recycling program a long time before the government 
opposite did.  I recognize that finally we have some pilot projects in 
Saskatchewan, and that is good.  But I really regret that it took two years 
for the minister opposite to institute that pilot project after the 
government announced that it was happening. 
 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, again to reinforce my comment that it's an effort 



 

 

we need to put into place 365 days of the year, and not only when it's 
politically opportunistic or when we have a day which we recognize, such as 
Earth Day. 
 
We need to stop, Mr. Speaker, on the part of governments, from ignoring the 
environmental laws when it's convenient politically for the government, as 
was the case with the Rafferty-Alameda situation, as was the case with the 
fact that there was no environmental review process with the Cargill 
Saferco fertilizer plant, and the list goes on and on. 
 
When governments begin to turn that around -- and I conclude my remarks, 
Mr. Speaker -- when governments begin to turn that around and begin to obey 
the laws of the environment in the same way as they expect the public to 
obey them, we will finally be doing an adequate job in protecting the 
environment.  And that is what the members on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, are committed to doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

POINTS OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise to raise 
a question of privilege in accordance with the rules of the Assembly and in 
accordance with the parliamentary authorities.  In conformity with these 
rules of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I've provided to you earlier today 
advance notice of my intention to raise this matter.  I would like now to 
state the matter to the Assembly. 
 
On Friday last, Mr. Speaker, the government gave first reading to a Bill 
respecting a right of access to documents of the Government of Saskatchewan 
and a right of privacy with respect to personal information held by the 
Government of Saskatchewan.  This freedom of information Bill is one listed 
on today's order paper as Bill No. 70. 
 
Mr. Speaker, against the customs of the Assembly, the government provided 
copies of the Bill to the press and select interest groups on Friday 
morning prior to the proper tabling of the Bill here in the legislature.  
Instead of waiting until this Bill is properly printed and tabled for all 
members to see, the Minister of Justice invited members of the press and 
some members of the public to a special press conference and information 
session.  Those who attended were provided with an embargoed copy of the 
said Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I contend that this constitutes an even greater departure from 
the custom of the Assembly than all previous incidents where Bills were 
released to the press prior to tabling here in the House.  I submit, Mr. 
Speaker, that by distributing copies before the Bill was tabled in the 
Assembly and available to all members, the minister committed a breach of 
privilege. 
 
I refer, Mr. Speaker, to Beauchesne's, 5th Edition, article 16, which 
defines privilege as: 
 



 

 

 . . . the sum of peculiar (particular) rights enjoyed by each House 
collectively . . . and by Members of each House individually, without 
which they could not discharge their functions . . . 

 
He states further: 
 

 The privileges of Parliament are rights which are "absolutely necessary 
for the due execution of its powers".  They are enjoyed by individual 
Members, because the House cannot perform its functions without unimpeded 
use of the services of its Members. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan elected all the members of this 
Assembly on both sides of the House to consider Bills of public importance.  
There can be no such consideration if the Bills are not first tabled in the 
Assembly and given to the members.  I submit that by giving copies of the 
Bill to the press and some members of the public before providing any 
copies to members constitutes a breach of privilege. 
 
I am aware of the appropriate role and the important function played by the 
Speaker in such cases pursuant to Beauchesne's article 84, rule 2 of this 
Assembly.  Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I respectfully urge you to find that 
there is a case of prima facie, a case of privilege, after which I will 
move a motion along the following lines: 
 

 That this Assembly censure the Minister of Justice for having breached the 
privilege of the legislature by having provided copies of the Bill to 
certain members of the press and the public before having tabled it in the 
legislature and before providing copies to the hon. members in the 
legislature. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I welcome the hon. member from the Quill Lakes back.  I 
notice that his health has improved dramatically, and I certainly welcome 
him back. 
 
I, Mr. Speaker, would indicate that it certainly wasn't any intention.  We 
had been forwarding advance copies of the Bills to the opposition.  And my 
understanding subsequently that an advance copy was not given to the 
opposition, on this at least I've been, as I say, advised subsequently.  So 
if that being the case, I'll certainly apologize to the hon. members and to 
the House. 
 
The practice has been of course the technical briefings on complicated 
Bills prior to . . . Let me assure the hon. members and, Mr. Speaker, as 
the hon. member said, that they were put and placed under embargo until 
first reading in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  And I gather that's been a 
fairly common practice in the past.  And as I say, if it . . . what I did, 
I apologize to the hon. member.  I was under the assumption, as had been 
the practice earlier this session of giving advance copies to the 
opposition, if that didn't happen, I will apologize to the hon. members.  
It would be my error. 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- I have listened to the hon. member from Regina Elphinstone 
and the question of privilege which he is raising, and I've listened to the 
response of the Minister of Justice.  Now I wish to make a statement. 
 
I received a notice of a question of privilege at 11:35 a.m. this morning 
from the hon. member, for which I thank him.  Matters which relate to the 
ability of members to perform their duties are of serious concern. 
 
It has been the custom of this Assembly that when a minister is going to 
make an important announcement or indeed introduce legislation while the 
House is sitting, he does so in the Assembly before making the announcement 
outside the Assembly.  The development of this practice was based on the 
fact that members should be advised of new policies before the public 
generally.  This practice has usually applied to the distribution of Bills. 
 
The point raised by the hon. member is not a new circumstance.  The rules 
and precedents on this very point do not require that Bills be kept 
confidential until introduction in the Assembly.  Indeed precedents 
indicate that although it is a courtesy to the Assembly for a minister to 
release information in the Assembly before releasing it to the press or 
public, it is not a breach of privilege of this Assembly if such release of 
information is not initially made to the Assembly. 
 
I refer hon. members to some Speaker's rulings on this point.  You will 
find the rulings as follows: December 4, 1975, on page 63; April 5, 1976, 
on page 63; June 2, 1988, on page 142 of the Journals of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
I therefore rule that the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone, while he may 
have a grievance, does not have a point of privilege, but I do caution all 
members that the usual courtesies to the Assembly should be maintained. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise again pursuant to the rules of the 
Assembly to raise yet another point of privilege.  I raise this question of 
privilege further to my letter to you last Friday, and in accordance with 
my letter to you earlier today. 
 
The issue is the Government House Leader's failure to provide accurate and 
timely information to all members of the Assembly regarding the daily 
agenda for business here in the legislature.  More specifically, the issue 
is the sudden, unannounced, and arbitrary changes to that agenda made here 
last Friday. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that all members of the government caucus and all 
members of the opposition caucus realize that there are agendas that 
exchange between members of the cabinet, and there is agenda around that is 
not being shared with members of the opposition. 
 
More specifically, Mr. Speaker, if members of the Legislative Assembly are 
to fulfil their responsibilities to the public by active participation in 
the public's business in the legislature, then members must know what the 
agenda is going to be for the day.  The failure to provide accurate and 
timely information to members regarding House business agenda, particularly 



 

 

in circumstances such as last Friday, interferes with the ability of 
members to fulfil their responsibilities on behalf of the people they 
represent. 
 
I submit that it constitutes a breach of privilege.  I would therefore ask 
for your ruling on this question of privilege, Mr. Speaker.  And if you 
find that there is a prima facie case of breach of privilege, I would 
propose a motion along the following lines: 
 

 That the Assembly censures the Government House Leader, the member for 
Melfort, for having breached the privilege of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly by having failed to provide accurate and timely 
information to all members regarding the daily agenda for House business. 

 
Mr Speaker, I ask for your ruling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- As the hon. member has indicated, he has informed my office 
this morning of the question of privilege which he has just raised.  I've 
had the opportunity to consider the previous question but not the current 
one; therefore I reserve my decision and bring it back at the earliest 
possible opportunity. 
 
(1445) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
 D 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act to amend The Statues Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Statutes Act sets out 
provisions respecting citation and publishing of statutes.  The proposed 
amendments clarify the citation provisions and allow for more timely 
publication of new legislation. 
 
Under the existing Act the Queen's Printer must wait until the session is 
prorogued before the legislation is passed during that session, can be 
printed in a bound volume or as an update to the loose leaf.  This 
amendment will alleviate the attendant delay when sessions last through 
more than one calendar year by allowing the printing of annual volumes of 
statutes.  I move second reading of an Act to amend The Statutes Act. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the amendment is not controversial.  The 
amendment is an improvement to the law, and we are not opposed to it. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The hon. member from Regina Lakeview is on her 



 

 

feet. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, could I please have leave to introduce some 
guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I notice that in the galleries are some nurses 
from SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) who were present today at the rally 
and also Pat Stuart in the gallery facing me, the president of SUN.  And I 
wish to welcome the nurses here today in the legislature and point out to 
them that during question period we were asking the Minister of Health 
questions on hospital bed closures and job cuts.  So those questions were 
put to the Minister, Mr. Speaker.  But I understand both galleries have 
nurses in them this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- As well I'd like to say a word of welcome on behalf of 
all members of the legislature, and as Minister of Health, to nurses who 
are in the gallery today.  All citizens in the province will know full well 
that the nurses are involved in a collective-bargaining process, and that 
process while at times is difficult . . . and the nurses, as everyone will 
understand, are on the front lines of some difficult times in the health 
care system.  I welcome them here today and I'm glad to see them here to 
watch democracy in action. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Interpretation Act sets out 
rules to be used in interpreting all statutes of Saskatchewan.  There are 
two amendments to these rules proposed in this Act. 
 
Firstly, to facilitate their use in legislation, tables of contents are 
added to the list of reference aids that are inserted for convenience of 
reference only.  This is consistent with the fact that for the most part 
they consist of a list of the headings and marginal notes.  This amendment 
will facilitate the use of tables of contents in legislation. 
 
Secondly, references to regulation of Saskatchewan statutes and regulations 
from other provinces and territories and federal government will be deemed 
to be references to those statutes and regulations as amended from time to 
time.  This will eliminate the need to add the words "as amended from time 
to time" after each of those references is now done. 
 
I move second reading An Act to amend The Interpretation Act. 
 



 

 

Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, we will not be opposing this Bill, either. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 70 -- An Act respecting a right of access to documents of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and a right of privacy with respect to personal 
information held by the Government of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased today to rise to 
move second reading of The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act. This Bill is part of the government's legislative package of 
democratic reforms.  It will ensure that the Government of Saskatchewan 
continues to operate in the climate of openness and accountability. 
 
The Act will provide a right of access by the public to documents held by 
the provincial government.  The Bill will also provide for protection of 
privacy respecting personal records held by the provincial government. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is consistent with legislation in other Canadian 
jurisdictions.  I am confident that it will effectively balance the public 
right to information and the personal right of individual privacy. 
 
The Bill has been introduced in the spirit of open government that we have 
been told by Consensus Saskatchewan and others that the people of 
Saskatchewan desire.  The Act will make available much government 
information that has historically not been available in Saskatchewan. 
 
For example, the salaries and employment responsibility of the employees of 
government will be releasable under the Bill.  As well, the details of all 
personal service contracts entered into by the government will be 
releasable.  So will the expenditures of people travelling at government 
expense.  In addition, the names of individuals receiving discretionary 
licences, permits, and financial benefits from the provincial government 
will be available. 
 
The government will have to release the results of environmental testing 
and product testing.  It will have to release statistical surveys including 
polling results.  Background papers of a scientific or technical nature 
will also be available.  The reasons for discretionary decisions by 
government will be releasable.  Government guide-lines and policy 
statements will be releasable. 
 
The Bill provides for the protection of privacy, Mr. Speaker.  People will 
have the right to see their own personal information.  They will be able to 
ask to have the information corrected if it contains errors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act will 
also restrict the government in its collection, use, and disclosure of 
personal records.  The Bill will require direct collection of personal 
information.  It will require the government to ensure that personal 
information in its possession is accurate and up to date. 
 



 

 

The Bill will require that information be used for the purpose for which it 
was collected, or for a consistent use.  It will allow the disclosure of 
such information other than to the relevant individual only in limited 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act also 
creates the Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner.  The 
commissioner will be able to review government decisions made pursuant to 
the Bill, and there will be a further right of appeal to the Court of 
Queen's Bench. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act will 
ensure the government remains accountable to the people it serves.  And I'm 
very pleased to move second reading of The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to make a 
few comments on this Bill with regard to just two or three responses to the 
minister.  The minister makes the point that this Bill is very similar to 
the kinds of legislation provided in other jurisdictions.  I would say that 
that's partly correct, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's correct in a sense that we have a freedom of information Bill, so to 
that extent it's true.  In the other jurisdictions the freedom of 
information Bills are focused on providing additional government 
information that had not been available up to that point.  So the focus in 
the other jurisdictions has been to increase the access to information, 
that is, the way in which the government conducts public business. 
 
The difference is this Bill . . . the focus is on the exemptions.  It gives 
the flavour that there's going to be more openness, but there are eight 
pages, eight pages of exemptions in this Bill as to the kinds of 
information that will not be available, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is the major difference between this Bill and, I would say, the Bill 
that was on the order paper that we introduced almost a year ago.  That 
Bill, by the way, that had the support of groups like the Association of 
Saskatchewan Taxpayers, the Saskatchewan federation of independent 
business.  Our Bill, which was on the order paper, had the support of those 
groups plus many other groups in the community.  And I would say that it 
was not a restrictive Bill, it was a Bill to open up the records and the 
financial affairs of the Government of Saskatchewan.  And what we have here 
is a Bill that restricts access. 
 
For the minister says with some pride that this Bill is going to be 
providing information like . . . which I quote here from his -- well he 
repeated some of those comments today -- but I quote here from his press 
release. 
 
He said that this Bill, this new wave of freedom of information, is going 
to provide information regarding salaries of employees of government 
institutions.  It's going to provide details of personal service contracts.  
It's going to provide information in relation to costs of individuals 



 

 

travelling at government expense.  It's going to provide results of 
statistical or polling surveys and results of environmental polling and so 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is information that should be provided in this 
Legislative Assembly on a regular ongoing basis.  This is nothing new.  The 
only reason this is new is because this government has been withholding 
information from these areas up to this point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- So for the Minister of Justice to give us much faith from 
this Bill and from this statement that the public of Saskatchewan, which is 
concerned, very concerned about the secrecy of this government over the 
last nine years and their record of being closed and intolerant with the 
public, and an auditor that wants access to public expenditures, this Bill, 
with these very limited provisions, is not going to satisfy the auditor, 
it's not going to satisfy the public. 
 
So that's the other major response I have to the minister, is this is a 
Bill that puts restrictions on access to information, not one that 
increases in any substantial way the kinds of information that is going to 
be available to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre says, this makes a mockery of 
this Bill which is badly needed in the province of Saskatchewan and has 
been promised some six or seven times by this government and they've not 
delivered.  I mean if this is the best they can come up with, Mr. Speaker, 
after promising this Bill for some six or seven or eight, nine years, if 
this is the best they can come up with, Mr. Speaker, this is a very weak 
version. 
 
And I guarantee you this is the weakest Bill, this is the weakest freedom 
of information Bill in the entire country, including the federal freedom of 
information Bill.  This is not going to satisfy anybody. 
 
The minister also talks about, with Consensus Saskatchewan, there's a sense 
that the public has a sort of new expectation of openness.  That it took 
Consensus Saskatchewan, it took over $100,000 of public expenditures to 
come to the realization that the public wants open, accountable 
documentation of its expenditures. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you know and I know and everybody in Saskatchewan knows 
that the idea of their government's being accountable and open with the 
public is not anything new.  The Premier's New Realities paper, where he 
says that the public is expecting their governments to be open and 
accountable and expecting their governments to involve the public in 
decision making is nothing new in  Saskatchewan.  That's been the strength 
of the Saskatchewan governments over many years up until 1982, is the 
partnership with the people of Saskatchewan and their governments, whether 
that be local governments or school boards or small business.  It's been 
this government, Mr. Speaker, that has so badly jeopardized the notion of 
democracy in this province that the reality is new for them that the public 



 

 

wants Saskatchewan people to be open and accountable.  But that's nothing 
new -- that's nothing new. 
 
(1500) 
 
This government has betrayed and broken a trust of the public of 
Saskatchewan.  Now they're trying to scramble at 10 to midnight in their 
mandate.  Now they're trying to scramble as they did four and a half years 
ago to project this image that they are somehow open and democratic and 
accountable.  And, Mr. Speaker, this is too little too late, and it simply 
won't work. 
 
As an indication of just how open they are, Mr. Speaker, I came in to sit 
down this afternoon to some 90 annual reports, 90 annual reports that this 
government has been sitting on.  Now I just started leafing through those, 
and I notice that there's a report for the fiscal year ending 1987-88 for 
the prescription drug program, '87-88, an annual report, very timely 
report.  What's that, three years overdue?  Well I haven't gone through 
them all because there are some 90 annual reports that had been filed. 
 
Now we're looking today at the annual report for the 1987-88 annual report 
of the prescription drug program, Mr. Speaker.  My colleague in question 
period, from Regina Rosemont, talked today about the fact that we're still 
waiting on the SaskEnergy annual report for 1988-89, 1989-90.  In the 
spirit of openness that the minister just talked about . . . I mean this is 
an important public document, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only did the government illegally split SaskEnergy from SaskPower, 
according to the Provincial Auditor, but I know that they're saying that 
the auditor is not right.  They attacked the last auditor.  They're saying, 
well this new auditor isn't right either; this is just a dispute.  I know 
if they had the option to get another auditor, I assume they would do that, 
until they could get one that would agree with them.  But, Mr. Speaker, the 
idea of accountability and following a law, no auditor with credibility is 
going to legitimize the government's ability to break the law, and sanction 
it. 
 
And so there are all kinds of inconsistencies on a daily basis that reveal 
the true nature of this government's way of operating.  And I might say, 
the minister indicating today that it's been his practice to forward these 
Bills to us prior to the legislature . . . prior to them being tabled in 
the legislature, is simply not correct. 
 
For example, The Referendum and Plebiscite Bill, that also was . . . there 
was a press conference at 10:30 or 11 in the morning.  I tried to get a 
copy of that Bill about 11:30 in the morning and was not able to do that.  
I was told that there was an embargo on that and we were not able to access 
that. 
 
Finally at 1:15, at 1:15 of that day -- because I assume the minister knew 
that I would raise this as a concern -- at 1:15 that day we had a copy 
delivered to our House Leader's office.  And then of course, as was brought 
up today by the House Leader and which you certainly indicated was improper 



 

 

as I understood your ruling, Mr. Speaker, when the government talks about 
wanting to be open and accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, in the 
face of that we find the Minister of Justice, of all people, the one 
putting forth . . . putting the new face on this government, or trying to, 
about how democratic and open they are, this new mask, this new fac pçade, 
he calls together the media to release the Bill and release his public 
statement. 
 
Then he invites selected individuals, selected interest groups of his 
choosing, friends of the government -- invites those people and gives them 
the Bill before he gives the people of the province, the members of the 
Assembly, 26 members here who represent hundreds of thousands of 
constituents in Saskatchewan.  Special interest groups get that Bill in 
briefing before we do, and that is undemocratic, and that says something, 
Mr. Speaker, about the disregard this government has for this Legislative 
Assembly and about the disregard this government has for the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kevin Avram who happened to be there, and I quote from the 
Star-Phoenix on Saturday, April 20, that Mr. Avram says, and I quote just a 
brief couple of sentences here: 
 

 (Mr.) Avram, who attended at Lane's invitation, says he was "embarrassed" 
when he discovered that the Opposition had not been invited to attend 
(this briefing). 

 
 (Mr. Avram says) "I found it highly, highly inappropriate." 
 

And I say further: 
 

 "I think that the government owes the Opposition an apology.  It shows a 
complete disrespect for the legislature." 

 
It shows a complete disrespect for the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite this fac pçade that the government has of putting this 
new face of democracy on its nine-year record of complete disregard for 
democratic practice in this province, the public will not be fooled.  This 
is a deathbed repentance that simply will not work because they continue, 
as they bring these Bills forward, to make it very clear that they have no 
regard for democracy or for the Legislative Assembly and the practice of 
this Assembly. 
 
This is the same minister who said on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) that, well I know it's been nine and a half months since we've 
been in the legislature, but the place doesn't work anyway.  You know, we 
would rather be making decisions as a cabinet in dealing with problems and 
real issues.  That's what the public wants us to do. 
 
Well I think we saw, Mr. Speaker, with some 50 or 60 people in the gallery 
the day we opened, that the 45, 50,000 people or voters -- maybe 75 or 
80,000 people in Saskatchewan who have no representation in this 
legislature.  Well Kindersley for over 16 months, no representation in this 



 

 

Assembly. 
 
This is budget day tonight.  This is the second time, the second budget in 
a row, Mr. Speaker, where the citizens of Kindersley and Indian 
Head-Wolseley have no representation in the Legislative Assembly.  That's 
an absolute disgrace, Mr. Speaker, and I know that you agree with that.  
It's an absolute disgrace. 
 
The citizens of Souris-Cannington and Turtleford also have been eight or 
nine months without representation, Mr. Speaker.  That is just despicable.  
And for a government that says it's interested in democracy and openness 
and accountability, this simply is a contradictory statement and shows the 
true colours of this government Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, again just with regard to this new interest 
and openness in democracy, and I won't quote extensively, but just to draw 
your attention to another article that was in the Saturday Leader-Post, 
April 20, and the Star-Phoenix, by Mr. Dale Eisler, the editor of those 
papers . . . not the editor of the paper, but the political columnist. 
 
Basically he's making a bit of a mockery of after nine years of showing no 
regard, virtually no regard for democratic practice and accountability and 
openness and public access to information and participation -- after nine 
years of showing little interest or regard for the public in these areas, 
he is somehow trying to put a face of democracy on their mandate at the 
tail-end. 
 
What Mr. Eisler says is that while the government might like to talk about 
their new democratic initiatives, they might not like to hear about it, but 
that doesn't change the fact that they've too often simply ignored 
democracy.  And he mentions of course the fact that there are the four 
vacancies.  He also mentions that no other government in the history of the 
province has been more lax in releasing annual reports, financial 
statements, than this government. 
 
He also points out that in 1987 this government acted for over three months 
illegally -- special warrants by cabinet illegally, outside the 
legislature.  What he could have added is that they've also done that this 
year -- some $350 million which they approved prior to the legislature 
coming into session. 
 
But of course he says -- the last thing I'm quoting -- Mr. Eisler says 
that: 
 

 No party has abused the democratic traditions of the legislature and 
created the need for laws compelling governments to follow some 
rudimentary democratic principles than the Tories. 

 
Now that is a scathing indictment, Mr. Speaker, when for many, many years . 
. . 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's an accurate indictment. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- It's an accurate indictment, too.  For many, many years, 
when this Legislative Assembly operated with a sense of convention and 
history and democratic practice, a lot of unwritten rules, where this 
government has so badly, has so badly jeopardized the credibility within 
this place, it's almost . . . it's bastardized its ability to function. 
 
They have to bring in laws.  I mean, those weren't required in the past.  
They're bringing in laws to require governments to share information, share 
financial statements, table reports on time, and all of the things that 
used to be done as a matter of course, Mr. Speaker.  I would say . . . I 
could be wrong but I would say that never ever before have 90 annual 
reports and financial statements been tabled on the same day, some of them 
up to three years old, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague says. 
 
I would also say that never before -- before last Friday -- never before 
has a government given the opposition an agenda just before the House 
opened and then completely changed the agenda just as the orders of the day 
began, and then sat there and laughed about it and said, well that's a good 
one on you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government has resorted to that, if that's what they 
have resorted to, this place becomes unworkable, Mr. Speaker.  And they can 
bring in all the laws they want, but unless there's a will to co-operate, 
unless there's a will to make this place work, then the situation is simply 
going to deteriorate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would say that . . . The one final example I would give, before I make 
a few specific comments on this specific Bill, of a lack of sincerity, a 
real lack of sincerity to be open, is that in the boundaries Bill, which of 
course they've had to do a couple of times now. But in the boundaries Bill 
that we saw last week, the government did not even . . . They're so used to 
making decisions in cabinet and they're so used to not thinking about 
consultation with the public that they left out of that boundaries Bill 
that there shall be public forums. 
 
They left out of that Bill that the public shall have input into their 
boundaries report.  Now what else does one have to say, Mr. Speaker, about 
the lack of interest by this government in openness and participation by 
the public.  What else does one have to say? 
 
Now I would say, as I said earlier, the distinguishing feature between this 
Bill and Bill 20 that we introduced last June and the freedom of 
information Bills introduced by other legislatures and passed by other 
legislatures, is that those Bills open up the kind of information that 
would be available to the public about government business and the 
conduction of public business by government, and whereas this Bill 
restricts, places major restrictions on the public about the kind of 
information that they can access. 
 
So this is another rushed Bill, obviously to again try and put a different 
face on a government that has many, many years of running roughshod over 



 

 

the public and many years of undemocratic behaviour.  And when they rush 
these Bills, of course they become bad Bills.  They're drafted badly.  In 
some ways you might say they've been drafted according to their agenda too, 
because they're drafted not with the public view in mind but with their own 
cabinet agenda. 
 
So this is the fifth or sixth commitment we've had on freedom of 
information.  And when you consider that, when this government has been 
promising since 1982, freedom of information, they couldn't have done -- I 
say this with respect -- they could not have drafted a Bill any worse than 
they've done in this one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Quality is suspect of the Bill.  The major flaw, Mr. Speaker, are the seven 
pages of exemptions as I had referred to.  Related to that, there is 
another safety valve, you might say, for the Premier, for the cabinet, and 
for the heads of departments and Crown corporations, designed to make sure 
that if there are not enough exemptions to sharing information, that the 
Premier can intervene, the cabinet can intervene . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Just in case there was a . . . (inaudible) . . . of 
getting some information. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, in case the cabinet decides that there should have 
been a ninth or a tenth page of exemptions, of secrecy exemptions here.  
This Bill gives the power of the Premier or the cabinet or the departmental 
head to define the areas in which the public has access to information. 
 
As I read this Bill, as we read this Bill, the commissioner -- which is an 
initiative, by the way, that I do support -- but the commissioner's powers 
are limited to dispute powers rather than to suggesting to the government 
areas where information should be provided. 
 
It's a very, very restricted role for this individual, for this office.  
And it's in many ways similar to what they did with the Boundaries 
Commission of 1989.  And that is that they tied the hands of the Boundaries 
Commission in 1989 in the same way they've tied the hands of the Privacy 
Commission office and allowed the Premier and the cabinet, consistent with 
the power that this cabinet has when Bill 5, the reorganization Bill, 
allowed the government to organize and reorganize government departments 
and Crown corporations without coming back to the legislature. 
 
So this Bill and all of the others, like the referendum Bill as well, are 
geared to make sure that cabinet does not lose any of its authority, does 
not lose its ability to continue making decisions outside this legislature, 
Mr. Speaker, which is a very, very democratic practice that the public of 
Saskatchewan is concerned about. 
 
The other flaw in this Bill, in my view, in our view, is that the Bill is 
geared more, Mr. Speaker, to you or I or some member of the public getting 
access to information about them that may be on government records.  And 
while that is important, we want to know what government has on their files 



 

 

about us.  And that is very important so I don't mean to minimize that, but 
that doesn't make up for the fact that what people really want from this 
government are some basic answers. 
 
You know the sweetheart deal with Saferco, what is that arrangement?  The 
sell-off of the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation, what are the details of 
that arrangement?  The financial affairs and records of SaskEnergy, what 
has happened with SaskEnergy?  Many legitimate questions.  Where has all 
the money gone?  That is the information that the public of Saskatchewan 
wants from this government.  They want to know where has all the money 
gone. 
 
The member from Morse says, to pay for Senator Berntson's severance 
package.  Well that's fine.  Mr. Speaker, they want to know where all the 
money has gone because what we're facing tonight are more tax increases: 
the provincial goods and services tax, a regressive consumption tax on the 
average and low income family of this province.  And this tax will not 
pass, Mr. Speaker.  We guarantee you that this will not pass. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- That being aside, that is what the public is concerned 
about.  They're concerned about not being provided with the information 
concerning salaries, travel expenses.  You know, the Don Adams commercials, 
the Get Smart commercials -- the public wants to know that information.  
True, but they want to know a lot more information.  They want to know 
about SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) deals. 
 
You know, this government that claims to be open and wants to be open, they 
continue to refuse to give a list of the names.  They continue to refuse to 
give a list of the names of SEDCO loans, loans that have already been 
approved.  Well, people want to know who's got loans in the past, how much 
money, where that money has gone. 
 
We're still waiting for information relating to the GigaText fiasco.  
They're still waiting for that information.  The deputy premier at the time 
who said, well as a matter of integrity, I will take full responsibility 
for this.  Well when it became clear that this was a major fiasco, he 
didn't even have the decency to resign.  So what does taking full 
responsibility mean, Mr. Speaker?  There's no sense of integrity on that 
side of the House when it comes to sharing information.  That's why the 
public is a little sceptical about this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, from our point of view, we did not place the 
restrictions.  We placed some legitimate restrictions.  Obviously there 
have got to be some privacy protections in any freedom of information Bill.  
They've got to be reasonable.  Citizens have to be assured that their 
rights will be protected and information about them will not be shared 
openly with other people.  But we had a list of some seven or eight or nine 
exemptions.  They've got a list of seven or eight pages of exemptions, Mr. 
Speaker, and that's the difference -- with the power to add. With the power 
to add, Mr. Speaker.  A safety valve with the power to add if they hadn't 
deal with enough exemptions. 



 

 

 
And as my colleague says, they would save a lot of paper if they just 
indicate the areas which would be included where information could be 
provided. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are some principles here.  There are some 
principles that aren't evident in this Bill.  There's a principle of 
honesty, the principle of openness, the principle of accountability, the 
principle of respect for the public and of access to information. 
 
Everybody respects the fact that there have got to be some exemptions and 
that there has got to be an independent review, an independent panel, 
whether that be the Ombudsman as we suggested, or the Privacy Commissioner. 
We're not going to get hung up on that. 
 
But the main thing is that there be the ability of the public to take issue 
if they do not agree that the information that they feel they have the 
right to receive has not been provided. 
 
I understand Mr. Avram said on Friday that he understands under the 
provisions of this Bill that he would not be able to access the details of 
the Saferco deal.  Well that's exactly the kind of deal that he wants the 
detail to, Mr. Speaker, as do the public of Saskatchewan.  And so if that 
third party information is not going to be available, then this freedom of 
information Bill is just a sham. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that there are many other areas in which I could go on 
and on about how this government . . . the record of this government in the 
face of this Bill. Because let's face it, this Bill, when you look at the 
exemptions in this Bill . . . but this Bill has got to be looked at in 
relation to nine years, in relation to nine years of blatant disregard for 
openness, to a government that has never been more secretive, a government 
that has never been more closed.  And what the Premier does is he preserves 
the right to be even more closed by that one section in the Bill that I'll 
refer to in the committee. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Like a dictatorship. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  This is a government that is like a dictatorship.  There's no 
question about it.  This government thinks it's beyond the law.  There are 
many examples where this government has broken the law.  SaskEnergy is not 
the first example.  They tried to separate SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). Fortunately the courts stopped them on that.  But they have 
been . . . they're in court on the boundaries, they're in court on 
Rafferty, they're in court on Principal Trust -- this government is in 
court all the time.  They're spending millions of dollars, millions and 
millions and millions of dollars on lawyers, fighting citizens' initiated 
concerns in the court, Mr. Speaker, defending all of their actions for 
breaking the law. 
 
A government that's been in court on seven or eight issues in the last 
year, Mr. Speaker.  That says something about how a government functions, 
when citizens have got to take them to court on every issue. 



 

 

 
Now they've only designated $740,000 to hungry children in this province.  
Now there could be millions and millions of dollars that they're wasting in 
court, by breaking the law, that they could be providing to hungry children 
or to support small-business people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are providing $740,000 to Chuck Childers and wasting millions and 
millions of dollars in the court system, but $740,000 for hungry kids.  And 
the Minister of the Family said on Friday, so what.  That was his response 
to this.  The Minister of the Family. 
 
So the record of this government, Mr. Speaker, has got to be looked at in 
relation to this last 10 to midnight Bill, which is very, very weak, and 
the record of withholding information from Crown Corporations Committee.  
Mr. Speaker, I know that you know that if the government wants to be open, 
they would not be restricting over 50 per cent of the provincial 
expenditures, which they now do, in the Crown Corporations sector. 
 
Even the auditor is expressing concern that the government has privatized 
the auditing function, even the auditors, even the private auditors, and I 
say that with respect.  The private auditors are doing a good job, but 
they're taking issue with the way this government conducts its business and 
does not share financial information. 
 
But the Provincial Auditor wants the ability to have the private auditors 
work for him under his scrutiny, not under the scrutiny of the cabinet, Mr. 
Speaker.  The Provincial Auditor can't get information.  The Provincial 
Auditor says the government acts illegally.  The Provincial Auditor is 
obviously going to be upset about 90 annual reviews, annual reports and 
financial statements to be provided in one day. 
 
The Provincial Auditor and the public of Saskatchewan want details of 
megaprojects which they've not had available to them.  They want the 
details of the sell-offs, Mr. Speaker, Sask Potash Corporation being a good 
example, basically given away; Saskoil, another good example, basically 
given away.  We've not had the details there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan wants details about tendering.  
Another major cloud over this government has been their shady dealings 
around the tendering -- no fair tendering policy.  Millions and millions of 
dollars going out to friends, to patronage friends, to parties who donate 
to the Tory party, but no details being provided on those patronage deals, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The lack of fair tendering policies and patronage is one of the biggest 
concerns of small-business people in Saskatchewan.  You're either in the 
select group that's in with this government or you're out, Mr. Speaker.  
And of course the average small-business person with this government is on 
the outs. 
 
Where is their legislation on fair tendering that they promised?  Where is 
the legislation on conflict of interest, Mr. Speaker?  We only hear about 
conflict of interest when there's another scandal, and that's not good 



 

 

enough.  That's what the public is saying about this last minute deathbed 
repentance on democratic reform -- it's not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When are they going to start answering questions, orders for return, if 
they're serious?  When are they going to start answering questions in Crown 
Corporations Committee?  When are they going to start . . . call 
by-elections?  They've been promising for one year now that an election is 
around the corner and so there's no point having a by-election because the 
public doesn't want them to waste money. 
 
What the Premier didn't say is that six months ago he got a letter from the 
mayor of Kindersley, asking for a representative for that area.  The people 
of the Kindersley constituency don't know where to go.  They've got no 
representative to talk to, so . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And what did the Premier say?  He said, so what. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Basically the Premier, as the message has been, so what. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I'm saying, what we're saying on this side of House -- 
and some feedback we've had over the weekend on this Bill, this 40-page 
Bill, mainly filled with exemptions -- is that nothing is going to change. 
 
The information that the public was hoping to get will still be restricted.  
In case they've forgotten any exemptions, the Premier still has the ability 
to add a few more exemptions, a few more amendments.  The power of the 
cabinet will not change by this Bill.  This is window-dressing, Mr. 
Speaker.  At best this is window-dressing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what the public is looking for is straightforward 
openness, consistency, accountability.  They want to participate in 
decisions, not just through cabinet-controlled referendums, but on their 
daily lives, the daily opportunities.  There are many forms there. 
 
(1530) 
 
If this government was really interested in the public's views for the last 
four or five years we would have had the all-party Agricultural Committee 
touring the province to seek the views of farmers and small-business people 
in rural Saskatchewan and other people across the province to get their 
views on a very serious agricultural crisis. 
 
That shows the forms, the mechanisms were there and they did not use them.  
That shows that they're not interested in public input, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr Speaker, I've got many more things that I want to say on this Bill 
because there are many concerns about this Bill.  And a lot of other people 
have indicated to us over the weekend that they have got a lot of concerns 
about this Bill.  They want to meet with us on those concerns.  They know 
it's pointless to meet with the government because they're really only 
interested in the optics of this at the end of the day.  And they know that 
the government is basically going to say, so what, anyway. 
 



 

 

So with those few comments, Mr. Speaker, at this point I would like to beg 
leave to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill 71 -- An Act respecting a right of access to documents of local 
authorities and a right of privacy with respect to personal information 
held by local authorities 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This Bill, like The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act is part of the 
government's package of democratic reforms.  It was introduced to enhance 
the spirit of open and accountable government at both the provincial and 
local levels. 
 
The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act 
will provide a right of access by the public to documents held by local 
authorities.  They will also provide for protection of privacy respecting 
personal records held by local government.  It is similar in form and 
substance to The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act.  It 
effectively balances the public right of access and the personal right of 
privacy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill will cover urban, rural, and northern 
municipalities, and library boards.  It will cover educational bodies such 
as the boards of education of regional colleges, SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), and the universities.  And 
finally, health care by a health body such as hospital, home care boards, 
special care home boards, and ambulance boards are subject to the Act. 
 
Like The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, the local 
authority Bill will make available information that has not until now been 
available in the province. 
 
For example, the salaries and employment responsibility of employees of 
local authorities will be releasable under the Bill.  As well, the details 
of all personal services contracts entered into by local authorities will 
be releasable, as will the costs of people travelling at the expense of 
local authorities.  The names of individuals receiving discretionary 
licences, permits, and financial benefits will be available. 
 
Like the Bill affecting provincial government bodies, this Bill provides 
for the protection of privacy.  The people have the right to see their own 
personal information held by local authorities, and they will have the 
right to request that their personal information be corrected if it 
contains errors. 
 
The Bill will also restrict local authorities in their collection, use, and 
disclosure of personal records.  Like provincial government bodies, local 
authorities will be required to collect personal information directly from 
individuals.  They will be required to ensure that personal information in 
their files is accurate and up to date. 
 



 

 

The Bill will require that information be used for the purpose for which it 
was collected or for a consistent use.  It will allow the disclosure of 
such information other than to the relevant individual only in limited 
circumstances.  And it contains a right of review by the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner appointed pursuant to The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act.  And again there will be a further right of 
appeal to the Court of Queen's Bench. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act helps ensure that Saskatchewan has an open government at the 
local level as well as at the provincial level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be further talks with those involved in the health 
care field before implementation of the Bill affecting them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'll keep my comments 
very, very brief because I understand that we want to adjourn to get ready 
for tonight, but I'll just make a few initial comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again we see the inconsistency by the minister which is 
reflected by the inconsistency of the government where he talks about the 
spirit of openness and consultation.  Mr. Speaker, the inconsistency is, as 
was evident in today's Star-Phoenix by the city commissioner in Saskatoon, 
no consultation with the municipalities about this Bill.  Can you imagine 
that, Mr. Speaker?  He says, the minister says, we'll have more 
consultations with the health care officials and others.  What they're 
looking for is initial consultation with their government, Mr. Speaker, 
some consultation.  So to say more would almost be misleading.  And I'm not 
suggesting the minister is being misleading, not intentionally.  But 
they're looking for initial consultation. 
 
I won't quote today from the city commissioner's concerns, but he basically 
says that this announcement caught the city of Saskatoon and the 
municipalities off guard.  They obviously were not consulted with, the 
implication being that, like the provincial government, the municipal 
levels of government are also not open and are undemocratic. 
 
And I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that the local governments provide a lot 
more detailed information than the provincial government of Saskatchewan 
currently does.  And Mr. Irwin from Saskatoon says this: that the 
information that the minister's talking about making public in his press 
release is information that is already available in the city of Saskatoon, 
and I assume in other municipal jurisdictions as well.  He talks about 
consultation and openness but then doesn't involve the municipalities on a 
Bill which actually will affect them. 
 
I had a couple of calls over the weekend, and I'm told that there may even 
be some constitutionality concerns about this Bill.  Therefore it requires 
further study and discussion on our part, very careful consideration and 
consultation with some legal people as well. 



 

 

 
But the point is, this is another fac pçade on wanting to be open and 
democratic.  The Bill again like the other Bill . . . And the minister is 
correct.  It resembles the other Bill in many ways.  It's poorly drafted.  
It raises many questions and is complex, and it raises potential concerns 
in many sections, Mr. Speaker.  But it's a case of imposing legislation on 
another level of government.  It imposed taxes on another level of 
government. They've phased out the ward system even though local 
governments wanted the ward system.  They abrogated their responsibility on 
store hours even though the municipalities wanted them to take some 
leadership there. 
 
It's been the kind of consultation or lack of that they've had regarding 
capital works programs with local governments -- the transportation 
programs and systems.  They certainly didn't consult with the local 
governments about whether or not the local governments supported the goods 
and services tax, federally nor provincially. 
 
And that's why the public views these Bills with a high degree of 
suspicion, Mr. Speaker, because their record, the other hand doesn't match.  
There's no consistency.  The other hand of day-to-day practice by this 
government doesn't match their intent and thrust and commitments in these 
Bills.  And that's why the public is very concerned about double messages. 
 
And the only thing that you have to go back to as to how the government's 
going to behave is their past record.  And I would say that 99 per cent of 
the public will put their faith in the city commissioner of Saskatoon about 
his concerns, and in the Provincial Auditor, before they'll put their faith 
in this government saying it's going to redeem itself by these new rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, I've got many concerns about this Bill and the major 
concern I have about it is that it reflects a continuation of this 
government's lack of interest in sincere co-operation with the local levels 
of government and gives the message that local governments are not sharing 
information and co-operative and accountable, which isn't true.  They've 
done very well -- very, very well in that regard when compared with this 
government. 
 
Given that we're pressed for time, Mr. Speaker, today, which I respect, I 
would like to beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


