





























































Hansard: April 12, 1991


 

 

April 12/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
 
Clerk: -- Members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish to inform you that 
following the announcement of his resignation in the House yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker Arnold Tusa submitted his letter of resignation dated April 11, 
1991 to my office, which I now read to you as follows: 
 

 In order to accommodate the wish of the House to elect a Speaker under the 
new rules adopted by the Assembly today, I hereby submit my resignation as 
Speaker effective immediately.  I wish to thank the Legislative Assembly 
for the privilege of serving the Assembly and the province in the Office 
of Speaker. 

 
The letter is hereby tabled. 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 10:03 a.m. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I am commanded by Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor to 
call upon you to proceed to elect a Speaker in order that the Assembly may 
be properly constituted according to law. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:04 a.m. 
 
Clerk: -- Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty to inform you 
that only one candidate has declared his intention to stand for election to 
the Office of Speaker pursuant to rule 21.3(1).  Therefore, it is my duty 
to announce that Arnold Tusa, the hon. member for the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, is declared elected as Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Members of the Legislative Assembly, I beg to express my 
grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of the high honour the Assembly 
has been pleased to confer upon me.  And while I leave the floor of this 
Assembly to take the Speaker's chair, I feel that I also leave all 
political partisan feelings in order that I may discharge with impartiality 
to all and to the best of my ability the various and important duties 
pertaining to the high office of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Fellow members of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, I thank you for 
having elected me as your Speaker.  The Legislative Assembly in 
Saskatchewan has been at the leading edge of change in our country.  
Examples such as early radio broadcasts in our history and television 
coverage to allow our proceedings to be accessible to the people of the 
province demonstrate the will of our Assembly in the past to adapt and 
change. 
 
As noted in yesterday's Rules Committee report, the election of a Speaker, 



 

 

who is the servant of the House, symbolizes one of parliament's earliest 
assertions of independence.  To uphold that important principle, your Rules 
Committee has recommended that this House duly elect a Speaker.  You have 
followed the committee's recommendation.  By so doing, you have taken the 
important step of ensuring that Speakers will be elected by members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have had the honour and pleasure of acting as your Speaker since 1986.  
This morning members have chosen to elect me without opposition.  May I 
convey to you the deep appreciation I feel for your confidence. 
 
I wish to reiterate that I will continue to carry out my duties as your 
servant to the best of my ability.  I now accept my responsibilities as 
your Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor re-entered the Chamber at 10:11 a.m. 
 
The Speaker: -- May it please Your Honour: 
 
The Legislative Assembly has elected me as their Speaker, although I am but 
little able to fulfil the important duties thus assigned to me. 
 
If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into 
error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to the Assembly, 
whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable them to 
discharge their duty to their Queen and country, humbly claim all their 
undoubted rights and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of 
speech in their debates, access to your person at all seasonable times, and 
that their proceedings may receive from you the most favourable 
consideration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I am commanded by Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor to 
declare to you that she freely confides in the duty and attachment of the 
Assembly to Her Majesty's person and government, and not doubting that 
their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper, and prudence, she 
grants and upon all occasions will recognize and allow their constitutional 
privileges. 
 
I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access 
to Her Honour upon all seasonable occasions, and that their proceedings, as 
well as your words and actions, will constantly receive from Her the most 
favourable construction. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:14 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 



 

 

pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly for several 
hundred residents of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are opposed to a 7 
per cent tax on restaurant meals and are urging the provincial government 
to reverse its decision to impose the 7 per cent provincial GST (goods and 
services tax). 
 
These petitioners are from a number of communities in Saskatchewan, 
including Saskatoon, Balcarres, Wynyard, Pilot Butte, Mankota, Indian Head, 
Rosetown, Dodsland, and Wilkie. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have a number of petitions that I would 
like to present to this House.  Pursuant to rule 11, I will do so.  They 
are several hundreds in numbers.  All of them, Mr. Speaker, these 
petitioners, are opposed to the 7 per cent provincial GST and have 
expressed those sentiments to us. 
 
The ones that I will be presenting are from areas like Carlyle, Borden, 
Saskatoon, Grandora, and many other locations here in Saskatchewan.  On 
behalf of these people, Mr. Speaker, I present these petitions to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to join with my 
colleagues in presenting several hundred petitions that were given to us to 
present on behalf of certain business people in Saskatchewan and consumers 
arguing very vehemently, I might add, that the 7 per cent provincial GST 
will not only harm families but also business people in the province. 
 
Therefore on behalf of these individuals from Aberdeen, Waldeck, Rosthern, 
Viscount, Warman, Star City, Melville, I wish, pursuant to rule 11, to 
present these petitions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present the petitions on behalf of several hundred people who have 
signed, out of great concern about the 7 per cent provincial GST, concern 
about its devastating effects on small business, on restaurants in 
particular, as is stated in this petition, on Saskatchewan families, and on 
the Saskatchewan economy in general. 
 
I present these on behalf of the people who have signed these petitions, 
Mr. Speaker, in the hope that it will have some impact on the 
considerations of the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly for several hundred residents of 
Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are urging the government to reverse its 



 

 

decision to impose a 7 per cent provincial GST.  These petitioners are from 
a number of communities including Raymore, Semans, Archerwill, Wawota, and 
other communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise along with my colleagues to present 
several hundred petitions of people who are opposed to the provincial GST 
and have indicated by signing this petition.  They are from many different 
places in Saskatchewan, many of them from the city of Saskatoon which I 
have the honour to represent, but also including Melfort, Hague, Creighton, 
and Cudworth. 
 
It's with a great deal of sorrow that I have to lay this petition on the 
Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have several hundred residents of 
Saskatchewan who have signed petitions which I would like to table today 
pursuant to rule 11.  The petition expresses what the signers describe as a 
deathly concern about the possible implementation of a value added tax on 
restaurant food.  The petitions are signed by people from many centres in 
Saskatchewan, including Milden, Meadow Lake, Eston, Swift Current, and 
Porcupine Plain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present several hundred petitions on behalf of people who have signed 
asking the government to . . . indeed to listen to the wishes of many, many 
people around the province and remove this provincial GST.  These people 
are from such places as Rosetown, Moose Jaw, Plunkett, Sovereign, and 
Bracken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise as well, pursuant to rule 
11, to present a petition to the Assembly signed by several hundred 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, opposing the extension of the 7 per cent 
provincial GST beyond that which already exists. 
 
These petitioners represent a number of communities, Mr. Speaker.  Some of 
them are Young, Regina, Davidson, Unity, Wakaw, Dundurn, and Borden.  Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present 
petitions on behalf of many people in the province who are exercising their 
democratic right to have their views known to the members assembled here.  
These people are from Biggar, Herschel, Chaplin, Fiske, Martensville, 
Vanscoy, Warman, Langham, Delisle, and other communities, and all of them 



 

 

are very deeply concerned about the negative effects of the 7 per cent 
provincial GST which they now have to pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Legislative Assembly for several hundred 
residents of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners, who are members of families 
and businesses, are urging the government to reverse its decision to impose 
the 7 per cent provincial GST which has provided them with a crushing blow 
in this time of tough economy.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from a 
number of communities including Coleville, Smiley, Clavet, Alsask, 
Kindersley, Wynyard, Outlook, and the area I represent, Regina.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a 
petition to this Assembly representing several hundred residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  These citizens are opposed to the 7 per cent 
provincial goods and services tax on restaurant food.  The residents come 
from communities such as Watson, Martensville, Tisdale, Kindersley, 
Aberdeen, Melfort, Bruno, and Whitewood, as well as the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise also pursuant to rule 11 of 
this Assembly.  I would like to present a petition today signed by several 
hundred restaurant patrons from the communities of Simpson, Bruno, Eston, 
Harris, and Melville.  And they're calling on the government and this 
Assembly to find a remedy to the very unfair and the harsh goods and 
services tax that the provincial Minister of Finance is trying to impose 
upon Saskatchewan people.  Thank you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a 
petition from several hundred residents of the province of Saskatchewan.  
These petitioners are urging the government to reverse its decision to 
impose a 7 per cent provincial GST.  These communities include:  Leroy, 
Tisdale, Kelvington, and Fort Qu'Appelle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise as well 
pursuant to rule 11, and in defence of the democratic right of the people 
of this province to communicate to their government by way of petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this petition I have the names of several hundred 
Saskatchewan residents who express their deep concern -- in fact they use 
the phrase in the petition "deathly" -- that they are deathly concerned 
about the devastating impact that the Saskatchewan GST will have on many, 
many Saskatchewan families and many, many small businesses in our province.  
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from communities like Balgonie, Meadow 



 

 

Lake, Glenbain, Esterhazy, Martensville, Saskatoon, Melfort, Regina, 
Tisdale, Hudson Bay, Harris, and others as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I join my colleagues 
today, pursuant to section 11, to present several hundred petition names of 
Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, urging the government to reverse its 
decision to impose this unfair 7 per cent GST, which will create further 
hardship for families. 
 
These names, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Torquay, White City, 
Pilot Butte, Weyburn, Waskesiu, Luseland, and Shaunavon.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
this initiative and these hundreds of petition names are a very important 
expression of democracy in Saskatchewan, and I'm proud to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise also pursuant to rule 11 to 
present to the Assembly a petition signed by hundreds of people from across 
Saskatchewan who are protesting the imposition of an unfair and what they 
say is an unnecessary tax burden on them.  The people represented in these 
petitions come from Biggar, Glenbain, Fiske, Prelate, Pike Lake, Mayfair, 
Gray, as well as Meadow Lake, and I might say from my own constituency of 
Regina Rosemont. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, because of the particularly harsh effect of 
this provincial goods and services tax on consumers and on workers in the 
restaurant and hospitality industry and on restaurant owners and 
small-business people, I am pleased to present several hundred more names 
in a petition opposing the provincial government's goods and services tax. 
 
The names that I present today in the House, Mr. Speaker, these individuals 
live in the communities of Hodgeville, Weyburn, Humboldt, Mossbank, Canora, 
Shaunavon, Moose Jaw, and others, and they are united in their opposition 
to the provincial goods and services tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 
of the rules of this legislature to present a petition on behalf of around 
six hundred people from throughout Saskatchewan who are opposed to this 
government's decision to implement the provincial goods and services tax on 
restaurant food.  These people come from communities such as Rosetown, 
Paynton, Elrose, Kindersley, Outlook, and Middle Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too join my colleagues in rising 
pursuant to rule 11 to present nearly six hundred petitions signed by 



 

 

people who are concerned that the imposition of this harmonized provincial 
GST on restaurant food is going to mean the loss of many hundreds, if not 
thousands, of jobs across Saskatchewan.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Vonda, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Saskatoon, Martensville, Stockholm, 
Kerrobert, Uranium City, and Regina.  It gives me some distress in having 
to present these petitions, but some joy in the democratic process that 
allows people to be heard in making their views known to the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise too pursuant to rule 11 to present 
a petition to the Assembly for several hundred residents of Saskatchewan.  
These petitioners are urging the government to reverse its decision to 
impose the 7 per cent provincial GST.  And these petitioners are from a 
number of communities including Hardy, Unity, Shell Lake, and Theodore. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a 
petition to this Assembly on behalf of several hundred residents of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned with the regressive provincial GST, 
particularly as it pertains to restaurant food.  These individuals 
represent communities as diverse as Meadow Lake, Kindersley, and Smeaton.  
And I also note that one individual from Lethbridge felt compelled to add 
his name to the signature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a series of 
petitions to present pursuant to rule no. 11.  I thank you for recognizing 
me, Mr. Speaker.  This set of petitions amounts to the order of several 
hundred residents.  Like my colleagues who have presented the petitions 
before me, these too are urging the government opposite to reverse the 
decision to impose the 7 per cent provincial GST.  The ones that I'm going 
to table, sir, represent names from people located in Cudworth and St. 
Benedict, Birch Hills, Kinistino and in Saskatoon.  And I might say, Mr. 
Speaker, that this morning the total number of signators on these petitions 
that have been tabled, are in the approximate number of 13,400 Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- There will, of course, be many, many other petitions tabled 
in this legislature as the revolt and the opposition to what the government 
is doing mounts across the province.  Thank you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on Tuesday next I 
shall be moving an order of the Assembly do issue for return of the 
following: 



 

 

 
 For the period May 2, 1990, to the date this return was ordered: (1) a 

list of all advertising firms employed by each department, board, 
commission, Crown corporation, and agency of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and; (2) the total amount paid to each firm over the said 
period. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 
shall on Tuesday next move: 
 

 That an order of Assembly do issue for a return showing the total amount 
paid by each government department, agency, and Crown corporation for the 
period July 11, 1989 to the date this return was ordered, to commercial 
airlines and travel agencies for air fares, including in each instance: 
(1) the names and position of those for whom the fares were authorized 
and; (2) the cost, purpose and destination points for each trip. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday move 
an order of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

 The total amount paid by each government department, agency, and Crown 
corporation for the period April 1, 1990, to the date this return was 
ordered, to Dome Advertising, Dome Media Buying Services, and Roberts & 
Poole Communications. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday move 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

 For the period of June 19, 1990, to the date this return was ordered, the 
number of public opinion polls and market research projects ordered, 
performed, or commissioned, by or for each government department, agency, 
and Crown corporation, including in each case a brief description of the 
purpose of the poll or project, the total cost of the poll or project, the 
method by which the work was awarded, and the names of the individuals or 
companies who performed the work. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today it's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, a number of 
restaurant owners and managers and employees from different communities 
throughout Saskatchewan, who are in the gallery today to witness the 
tabling of the petitions indicating opposition to the provincial goods and 



 

 

services tax.  It clearly is their right to let their views known and their 
opposition to this unfair tax, and I would ask all members of the Assembly 
to join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to add to the hon. member's 
words of welcome to the restaurateurs here today.  I know over the past few 
weeks I've had a chance to meet with many of them.  I know it's been a 
difficult situation that they've faced, but I too would want to welcome 
them on behalf of this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you and 
through you, 10 grade 8 students and teacher Peggy Warren, chaperon Diane 
Booth, from Turtleford, Saskatchewan.  It certainly is not in my seat but 
close to it, but anyway they live in that beautiful parkland, the same as I 
do, and I feel very close to them.  I've been in their town many times.  So 
I'll be meeting them later for pictures, and I would ask all members to 
welcome them to Regina and to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 
you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to other members of the Assembly, Mr. 
Chris Banting, who is sitting in your gallery.  Mr. Banting is the 
secretary-treasurer of the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union, 
representing over 5,000 workers in this province. 
 
He also happens to represent the workers of Macdonald's Consolidated of the 
Safeway corporation, which have just lost their jobs in Prince Albert and 
in the city of Saskatoon because of the decisions by the Safeway 
corporation to centralize its operation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know Mr. Banting, doing a fine job representing these 
workers, will be speaking with other members of the Assembly to see if in 
fact something can be done to ensure that the jobs of Saskatchewan workers 
are kept here in Saskatchewan.  I would ask all members to welcome Mr. 
Banting. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to welcome Mr. 
Banting in view of the historic moment we had earlier in the Assembly.  
Although we tried to have another meeting -- had one earlier with him -- I 
couldn't accommodate his request for that, but I did meet on behalf of the 
union and the Safeway employees.  And I advised Mr. Banting that he would 
be well advised to meet with Safeway; that's what he requested of me.  That 
can be arranged, and he should take advantage of it.  And I welcome him to 
the Assembly.  I hope he enjoyed the proceedings this morning as well. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: -- I would also like to take this opportunity to introduce 
some guests I have.  I have some guests from my family here this morning 
who have come to witness this historic occasion and to enjoy the 
proceedings of the House: my sister, Carol; my sister, Rose; my grandniece, 
Melissa; my niece, Eulalia; my sister, Ann; and last but most important my 
wife, Larrissa.  Please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial GST 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and congratulations on 
your election today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my first question of course today under the new tenure in your 
office is directed to the honourable, the Premier, and it pertains to the 
provincial GST, the 7 per cent provincial GST that his government is 
imposing on all the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know today in the gallery again today we have people 
representing the restaurant industry which is going to be extremely hard 
hit by this 7 per cent provincial GST.  And we've tabled petitions 
numbering 13,400 in names, which I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, is kind of 
the tip of the iceberg as the tax revolt against this proposal mounts. 
 
My question therefore to the Premier is a very straightforward one.  Mr. 
Premier, you take the position that your government likes to listen to the 
people -- although some of us are suspect of that, especially in the fifth 
and last year of your administration -- but if it's true that you are 
listening to the people, my question to you is: sir, will you please stand 
in your place, recognize that this tax is being opposed by small-business 
people, farmers, and labourers, by the consumers in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Stand up and recognize that you made a mistake -- stand up 
-- that you could find the money elsewhere by cutting out the waste in your 
government and say that you're not going to proceed with this 7 per cent 
GST. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I would just reiterate to the hon. 
member, as I've said to many members of the food and beverage industry, is 
that we recognize that the decision to harmonize and leave the rate at 7 
per cent was a difficult one, a difficult one particularly for their 
industry because they were hit with two new taxes within the space of three 
months of each other.  No question about it, Mr. Speaker -- difficult. 
 
We have tried to ameliorate the impact to the degree that one can.  I am 
not trying to suggest that one can ameliorate it totally in the 
transitional period, but we are adjusting commissions, change the liquor 
consumption tax and if they so chose to take up that room, it could mean 



 

 

something in the order of three and a half million dollars in foregone 
revenue from the provincial treasury, that they may well choose to pick up.  
And of course like every other business in Saskatchewan, effective January 
1, '92 they will be eligible for the input tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well the hon. member talks about the consultation and the advice this 
government has received in various consultations in this House.  As we said 
yesterday, we are all agreed on harmonization.  We all agree to expand the 
base to include restaurant meals, Mr. Speaker.  The argument, as the hon. 
member opposite has made himself, is the rate, whether we should have left 
it at seven or had some lower rate. 
 
But the primary recommendation in terms of the groups that we're listening 
to, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I believe the hon. member has . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new question and this one 
I again direct to the Premier.  And I might say as a preface, Mr. Speaker, 
I know the government has an option as to who answers, but I really ask the 
Premier to pay attention to this and to answer this question because it 
involves you in your capacity as the leader of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a very brief preliminary is required here, and I know the 
rules.  On or about March 26 a delegation from the town of Maple Creek, 
involving the mayor and some counsellors and the Chamber of Commerce and 
some representatives, met with members of the government in protest on this 
7 per cent provincial GST idea of the government opposite.  And they were 
shrugged off by a joke in the course of the meeting by the economic 
development minister. 
 
The Maple Creek News reports the following in the discussion about 
exemptions, quote: 
 

 This prompted Economic & Trade Minister Schmidt to read a poem, using 
biblical names, and noting how each person named requested exemptions for 
their respective causes.  After the government officials quit laughing, 
they were told by one delegate that the minister's comments were NOT 
funny.  The delegation was discussing matters that were vitally important 
to the survival of many businesses in the province, including restaurants 
. . . 

 
The Speaker: -- I realize the hon. member wishes to lead up to his question 
as well as possible, but I must inform him that truly his preamble is 
getting much, much too long and ask him to put the question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I shall take your request simply 
to say, by way of a preface, that this quotation refers to the joke and the 
effect that this had on the delegation and the small-business people. 
 
My question therefore, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier -- and I ask him to 
respond -- is this: Mr. Speaker, do not members of your cabinet . . . do 
not you realize that this is no joking matter when it comes to the survival 



 

 

of people who have invested their life savings, and to the workers who work 
in the restaurants and the businesses.  That this is no joking matter for 
the business people in the small towns?  And if you do so recognize it, I 
think this calls for steps to discipline the Economic Development minister, 
and what steps have you taken to discipline him? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, part of the basis and some of the people 
that we listened to when it came to the issue of if there was going to be a 
federal GST -- which there is -- that we should then take that next step of 
harmonization, included an expert committee that was put together last 
summer.  That committee included, among others, representatives from the 
Consumers' Association of Canada, the Regina Chamber of Commerce that 
represents restaurateurs and others, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and a member of the International Brotherhood 
of Electrical Workers.  And their first and foremost recommendation, Mr. 
Speaker, their first and foremost recommendation was -- and they used those 
words, first and foremost -- that the Government of Saskatchewan endeavour 
to participate in a joint federal provincial sales tax as soon as possible, 
with the objective of full integration by '92 or earlier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1045) 
 
This report . . . when we made a move on one of their other 
recommendations, which was side by side versus tax on tax, that member, the 
Leader of the Opposition, encouraged us to move forward with these 
recommendations.  And in fact when we went side by side instead of tax on 
tax he admonished us for not moving forward totally with their main 
recommendation which was full harmonization. 
 
He backed up his finance critic, who a year before had said if there is 
going to be a GST, let it be one tax.  We moved forward with his 
recommendation and the committee's recommendation.  Now for his own 
political purposes he chooses to take a different approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Now before we proceed to the next question, I would like to 
bring to the attention of members on both sides that here's an obvious 
example of a debate caused by lengthy answers and questions, and I'd like 
to ask members on both sides of the House to ask their questions and answer 
them according to rule. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think you will recognize that the Minister of Finance did 
not even remotely attempt to answer my answer about the attitude of the 
government and the ministers on this extremely important issue, not only 
for the people of Maple Creek, but everybody. 
 
I guess I'm going to have to be frustrated in not getting answers, and 
therefore I have to have a new question for the Premier. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, your Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation has budgeted 
some $6 million for executive air services, some $2 million for security 
services, and some other millions of dollars in other expenditures.  Yet on 
the other hand this new 7 per cent provincial GST is going to collect 
approximately $12 million from children's clothing and the new tax on 
reading alone. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this:  where in the world are your 
government's priorities?  A new provincial GST tax on reading and 
children's clothing, or eliminating the $12 million on executive flying -- 
where are the priorities?  You had a choice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as we all know, under the NDP, 
children's clothing as well as adults' clothing was taxed, Mr. Speaker.  We 
took the tax off . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Order!  The Minister of Finance is 
trying to answer the question, and I'd like to ask the Minister of Justice 
to allow him to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the NDP had the tax on 
clothing; we took it off clothing under $300.  And now yes, with this base 
broadening, the tax is back on. 
 
But because this government does recognize that for parents with children, 
that they now will have an additional burden of the 7 per cent on clothing 
as well as on reading materials and whatever else has been expanded, Mr. 
Speaker, to offset that, what we did is this, Mr. Speaker.  We put in place 
a $200 per child family tax credit which will offset the tax, the 7 per 
cent tax on close to three thousand dollars' worth of purchases per year.  
And families with incomes of under $24,355 will get that cheque in 
quarterly instalments, Mr. Speaker.  And the first cheques literally, as I 
understand it, Mr. Speaker, should be in the mail before the end of this 
month, Mr. Speaker.  That's how we're being fair to families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier, who is 
showing a tremendous abdication of leadership and responsibility.  Mr. 
Speaker, my question to the Premier is this. Under this new, unpopular 7 
per cent provincial GST which you and your government are imposing, you 
intend to collect approximately $24 million by taxing medicines, some 
medicines, and electrical usage.  For example, $24 million -- that, Mr. 
Speaker, amounts to about what the government pays by way of useless 
government advertising and propaganda. 
 
Again my question to the Premier is this: where in the world is your 
priority? Taxing electrical bills which affects our people in business and 
elsewhere, and certain medicines; or cutting out the waste and the 
expenditures by cutting out Maxwell Smart --and all the money for paid 
propaganda -- the American ad man and the American actor, Maxwell Smart, 



 

 

cutting out that expense.  I say to you, Mr. Minister of Finance, and Mr. 
Premier, you had a choice; you had a choice to cut back and instead you 
taxed the people and the farmers of Saskatchewan.  Shame on you.  Where are 
your priorities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, just to repeat: the position of 
both sides of this House is that if there is going to be a GST, which there 
is, is that we should have one tax.  It's been said many times in this 
House. 
 
I mean June '89, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Finance critic from across the way 
-- if we must have a federal sales tax then we should have one sales tax in 
this country, and not two.  And then he went on to say but moments later, 
but if we must have two taxes, we must have a federal sales tax, then we 
should have one sales tax in the country, not two. 
 
When the GST committee put out their report recommending food, restaurant 
meals and snack foods, they said yes.  They said get on with it; do not 
delay.  That's what we have done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why we have done that and why we have left the rate at 7 per cent is to 
make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we can shore up and revitalize the entire 
rural and Saskatchewan economy and every business in it, Mr. Speaker; and 
secondly, not let the debt and the deficit rise by $125 million, which 
would be irresponsible, Mr. Speaker.  That's why we've done those things, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the Premier.  Mr. 
Premier, I have before me the Provincial Auditor's report that was tabled 
yesterday.  And in this report, Mr. Premier, the auditor tells the people 
of Saskatchewan that you had a choice.  You had numerous choices, Mr. 
Premier, and I'll only refer to a few. 
 
Mr. Premier, you like to tell the people of Saskatchewan that you run a 
very tight ship of state.  But I'll tell you the Provincial Auditor tells 
you that your ship has sprung many leaks, many leaks. 
 
And I refer you, Mr. Premier, to page 24 of the auditor's report.  In it on 
page 24 the auditor says that Agdevco (Agricultural Development Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) lost $534,000 in future contracts and lays the blame on 
shoddy operations and controls at the corporations. 
 
Mr. Premier, I ask you:  is this the kind of waste and mismanagement that 
you couldn't afford to cut out and that forced you to implement the 7 per 
cent GST tax on the people of Saskatchewan?  Mr. Premier, you had a choice.  
You chose the wrong one. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to take notice of the 
member's observations and bring answers back to the Chamber at a later 
date. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Premier, I have a new question to the Premier, and, Mr. 
Premier, I hope that somebody else doesn't take notice of another leak in 
your ship.  Mr. Premier, that ship is going to be sinking, and it's sinking 
very fast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Premier, I refer you to another leak in your ship, on 
page 31 of the auditor's report.  And in that report, the Provincial 
Auditor says that the full-time chairman of the board of the Crown 
Investments Corporation, and other non-elected board members received 
$394,000 in salaries and remunerations, despite the fact that you had no 
authority in legislation to pay those salaries. 
 
Mr. Premier, I ask you: do you think that you didn't have a choice?  I 
believe that you did have, and the people of the province think that you 
had.  You could have done away with this waste.  Instead, you implemented 
the massive 7 per cent GST.  Mr. Premier, don't you believe that you had a 
choice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously we will be taking note of the 
auditor's comments relative to that.  I would just remind the hon. member 
that the practice there, relative to Crown corporations and the 
compensation issue that the member raises, as to my recollection the same 
practice has been followed for probably something like 25 years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Having said that, we will examine that recommendation in full. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question.  Mr. Speaker, I noticed that 
the ministers are taking note of these questions.  Also in the auditor's 
report, he did say that he submitted this report last December to the 
government.  Last December. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- And they are taking notice of these questions. 
 
My question is to the Premier, a new question.  Mr. Premier, I find another 
example of your waste, your mismanagement, and your government's 
incompetence.  On page 42 the auditor says you had another choice.  He 



 

 

refers to the Economic Diversification and Trade department, who he says 
lost $102,000 in a venture capital tax credit that it should recovered but 
it didn't. 
 
Mr. Premier, tell me again, and tell the people of Saskatchewan, that you 
really had a choice but you didn't take the . . . you didn't do it for the 
people of Saskatchewan.  Instead, Mr. Premier, you implemented the massive 
7 per cent GST tax not only on restaurateurs, but also on families, on 
small businesses.  Mr. Premier, you had a choice but you made the wrong 
one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the Minister of 
Finance's enthusiasm in assisting my department, but I am responsible for 
the department and I'll answer for these particular allegations. 
 
What we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a venture capital tax credit program 
that was in place and is being wound down.  The problem pointed out by the 
auditor is particularly complicated.  I am a lawyer and have some business 
experience but I have preferred to allow our lawyers and our accountants to 
try to solve this particular problem.  It is not a major problem as a 
matter of technical nature. 
 
If there's any money that is due to the government you have my assurance, 
Mr. Speaker, that we will take all measures to collect that money, but we 
are not at this time convinced that there is any money due to the province 
that is collectable under that particular heading.  And we will take the 
matter up further with the auditor and if he has ways that we can collect 
any money that he thinks is collectable under the venture capital tax 
credit program, then we will co-operate to try and recover that money. 
 
But at present we take the position that there is no money that could be 
recovered and that there's nothing improper.  But yes, there is a dispute 
that is highly technical and we will certainly try our best to look into it 
further. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 

Government Payments to Consulting Groups 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have a question for the Premier.  I 
want to turn to the Public Accounts, Mr. Premier, and I see that in the 
fiscal year 1989-90, the people of Saskatchewan paid a total of $680,000 to 
companies owned by your former political assistant and principal secretary 
David Tkachuk for direct mail campaigns.  Now why not cut out these 
patronage plums instead of adding a tax to the food that people eat?  You 
had a choice; why this tax? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises the question of 
direct mail and the nature of communicating with the public of Saskatchewan 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of the examples of direct mail are in my own Department of Health: the 
direct mail of the health statement that went to all citizens of the 
province, the direct mail of the statement, the direct mail on the 
statement regarding the scourge that is around the world these days in 
terms of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) and what that means to 
the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
All of those kinds of campaigns are done through direct mail.  Direct mail 
is a way in which -- and a very effective way too -- for a government to 
communicate its messages, but also to communicate information and the 
information that the public of Saskatchewan needs and frankly deserves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  I can see with 
explanations like that why we're getting more and more taxes in 
Saskatchewan.  I want to draw your attention, Mr. Premier, to the $341,000 
that you paid for polling in the same year, much of it . . . or all of it 
which the public was never allowed to see, and all of it or most of it 
which went to the PC Party's polling firm, Decima of Toronto. 
 
Now I want to ask you, why should Saskatchewan people pay an extra 7 per 
cent tax on the children's clothing so that you can continue to funnel 
money to Allan Gregg for diamond ear-rings?  You had a choice; why a tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, every . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  It's obvious that several people in 
the House have the answer.  However the Deputy Premier is in the process of 
answering.  Let us allow him to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member well knows, at least I 
believe he well knows -- his colleagues, some of them at least know -- 
every government in this country in times . . . in public life of what it 
is, and the serving of the public what it is, and the very complex society 
that we are in, every government in this country, governments around the 
world will use polling firms.  There's no question that that's true in the 
development of public policy. 
 
We use a particular polling firm.  We've readily acknowledged that for a 
long time.  You have used particular polling firms, not with such great 
success during your term in government.  During the hon. members' term in 
government they used particular polling firms, not with particular success, 
I might add.  But I would say to the hon. members, all governments have 
used polling firms in the development of public policy and those are 



 

 

reasonable expenditures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I would like to refer 
you to page 96 of the auditor's report, which shows how the Department of 
Social Services has failed to claim $1.9 million in cost-shared money owed 
it by the federal government, and as I understand, didn't even make this 
claim after the error was pointed out. 
 
Now why is it that your government won't go after your friend Brian 
Mulroney for money he owes this province, but you will threaten to fine 
businesses up to 10 per cent for any of the unfair provincial GST they 
refuse to collect?  Why, Mr. Premier?  You had a choice here, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As a past member of Public 
Accounts and so on, I am quite familiar with what public auditors' reports 
look like and the discussion of them.  I would like to point out that as 
far as the Department of Social Services is concerned, I am rather pleased 
with the auditor's report as far as the report is concerned.  I think some 
of the concerns that he has raised are certainly legitimate.  And as far as 
the Department of Social Services is concerned, they will be rectified.  In 
fact we are in the process of rectifying the four concerns that he is 
expressing. 
 
I might note at the same time that the particular concern that the hon. 
member has raised is a concern that has apparently been going on since 
1985, was only noticed by the auditor in this report for the first time.  
Certainly we are going after the federal government to get this money back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my intention to ask leave of the 
House to move first reading of a Bill now standing on the notice paper at 
the back of the Votes and Proceedings.  I beg to inform the Assembly that 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor having been informed of the subject 
matter of the Bill recommended to the consideration of the Assembly, and I 
move that with leave, first reading of a Bill respecting an Act to amend 
the Provincial Auditor Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act respecting the Tabling of Documents 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly I move first 
reading of a Bill entitled An Act respecting the Tabling of Documents Act. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 52 -- An Act to provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into 
Constituencies for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before I begin my remarks I did 
want to indicate to the House that I have forwarded a copy to the 
Opposition House Leader, of a proposed House amendment dealing with the 
matter of public hearings by the proposed commission. 
 
The legislation said "may."  We are substituting the word "shall" for the 
word "may."  It's our proposal.  It was always the intention of the 
commission that they would hold public hearings, but for clarification, 
that is being made mandatory in the legislation and a House amendment has 
been forwarded to the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation expressly creates a new Electoral 
Boundaries Commission consisting of Dr. John Archer, the Hon. Mr. Justice 
E.C. Malone, and the Hon. Mr. Justice R.L. Barclay, who shall be jointly 
charged with the duty of drawing a new constituency  
 Dmap for the province. 
 
The Bill provides that the commission shall divide the province into 64 
southern and two northern constituencies.  This division will embody the 
presumption of voter equality.  In determining the southern constituencies, 
the commission shall determine a provincial population quotient, and once 
this quotient has been established, the southern constituencies to be 
determined shall correspond as nearly as possible to this quotient. 
 
With respect to the two northern ridings, the commission is directed to 
ensure that the two northern ridings be nearly as possible the same size. 
 
In drawing these boundaries, the commission may depart from the quotient 
for the southern ridings or an equal split of the northern ridings only 
where it deems it to be necessary in light of density or sparsity of 
population in a region, geographical conditions in a region, or a special 
community of interests among or diversity of interests among inhabitants of 
a particular region. 
 
Under the provisions of this Bill the commission is empowered to hold such 
public hearings as it deems necessary to allow adequate public input into 



 

 

the creation of the new electoral boundaries.  No time frames for 
completion of the report of the commission have been included in the Bill.  
The commission is directed to establish its own rules in the conduct of its 
business. 
 
In the event of a vacancy on the commission, the vacancy is to be filled by 
the order of the Lieutenant Governor in Council following consultation with 
the registered opposition parties who have received more than 5 per cent of 
the vote. 
 
Upon completion of its report, the commission is directed to immediately 
provide the report to the Speaker for debate in this Assembly.  If the 
report is accepted, a Bill to implement the report is to be subsequently 
presented to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is certain that the commission, in fulfilling 
its mandate under the proposed legislation, will produce a constituency 
boundaries map in a timely and thorough fashion. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, there remains obviously a distinct possibility 
that when a report is tabled prior to legislation, the Supreme Court could 
overrule the Court of Appeal, in which case I think it would be accepted by 
all that legislation wouldn't be proceeded with.  So I do want to clarify 
my remarks on that, but I also suggest that that's a matter for further 
discussion between the political parties at that time. 
 
The other provision in the Bill deals specifically with what happens if a 
writ is dropped while the commission is sitting, and again that is 
self-explanatory at that time. 
 
The intent of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is to meet the criteria as 
established by the Court of Appeal, with the latter provision I mentioned 
about what happens if a writ is dropped.  It as well is designed to have as 
few changes as possible from the previous legislation so that we can get 
certainty as quickly as possible. 
 
I might advise the hon. members of the Assembly that the process can be 
accelerated.  If, for example, the commission chooses to have a fewer 
number of public hearings, time is saved.  I'm assuming that the commission 
will make that judgement call as to what is an adequate number, keeping in 
mind the need for all to have some certainty. 
 
I might advise it's not part of the Bill, but the process can be further 
accelerated, and this becomes a function after the commission of the Chief 
Electoral Officer, assuming new boundaries, the process can be rapidly 
accelerated if all parties agree to use the same poll boundaries as existed 
in the '89 map.  I know that if there are boundary changes, there may be 
some, I would suggest, relatively minor problems.  Those can usually be 
dealt with with an A and B poll.  My suggestion -- and it is only that -- 
that may be a small price to pay to accelerate the process.  But the time 
saved for the Chief Electoral Officer to draw up new boundaries is 
substantial.  And if the parties would agree to that, assuming new 
boundaries -- and again it's an aside, it's not in the ambit of the 



 

 

commission, it's not in the role of the commission to do that, but I just 
throw that . . . suggest that for the benefit of discussion that the 
opposition may wish to have. 
 
Having said that again, I've given what the intent is, the legislation, and 
some possibilities.  I think we can debate some of the possibilities on the 
timing of decision Court of Appeal, what possibilities of the type of 
decision . . . I'm sorry, of the Supreme Court.  Rather than debate those 
and the options by again . . . it's certainly up to the opposition.  We can 
do that in second reading debate if that's the case, or some other form of 
discussion. 
 
I'm certainly prepared to discuss those, but how the opposition wishes to 
proceed on that is up to them.  But I'm certainly prepared to raise the 
possibility of some of the various options.  I leave that in the 
opposition's hand. 
 
(1115) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to provide for the 
Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of Members of 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
Before I begin my remarks, if I could just take a second to congratulate 
you on your appointment and to indicate that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Election. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Election, pardon me, and to indicate a high regard for your 
professionalism and your commitment to making the legislature function more 
effectively, and I wish you all the best in the Chair.  So if that's in 
order I would like to put that on the record and thank you very much. 
 
I'm pleased, Mr. Speaker, to have the opportunity to speak to this Bill 
before us today.  And I knew in some ways a couple of years that we may be 
very well back here again, as we are, as several others have said we may 
be, because these boundaries clearly . . . The writing was on the wall 
about them being unconstitutional to everyone except the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is significant, in my judgement, for three reasons 
at least.  And firstly, it's significant because it deals with the right, 
the fundamental right of all of our citizens to have the free vote in a 
free society.  Secondly, this Bill is significant because it is clearly 
this government's scrambling attempt to resolve the electoral chaos that 
was created by this government by their arrogance, by their incompetence, 
and by their flagrant disregard, Mr. Speaker, for the law. 
 
And thirdly, this Bill is significant because the history of this Bill, it 
typifies and illustrates that government's record -- dismal record, I might 
say -- with respect to the basic democratic rights of Saskatchewan people. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, democracy is more than just talking about democracy.  Actions 
have to show that you're really concerned and sincere and committed to 
democratic behaviour.  That has not been the record of this government. 
 
In many ways, Mr. Speaker, the most significant provision of the Bill 
before us today is section 18, the section that repeals the government's 
1987 legislation which was criticized by the opposition.  That's a matter 
of public record.  It was criticized by independent outside experts from 
across Saskatchewan and of course last month was found unconstitutional by 
the courts, validating those earlier concerns from 1987, '88, '89. 
 
As all members know, Mr. Speaker, that Bill was passed in 1987, the same 
year that the government opposite made several other arbitrary and, I might 
add, harmful decisions as they relate to Saskatchewan citizens.  That was 
the same year that the government eliminated the school-based children's 
dental plan and fired several hundred dental nurses from rural 
Saskatchewan, I might add.  1987 was the same year that the government 
undermined the prescription drug program in Saskatchewan and began their . 
. . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What's this got to do with boundaries? 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well it has to do with erosion of democracy and arrogance 
and mismanagement, Mr. Minister.  That was the same year that they began 
their relentless attack on medicare, and I refer specifically to 
underfunding of our institutions, our hospitals, our waiting-lists, and of 
course cuts to home care, just to name a few. 
 
That was the same year that this minister opposite, this very minister who 
at the time was minister of Finance, announced his $800 million error in 
the budget deficit.  I mention this because this has to do . . . honesty 
has to do with democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
1987 was the same year that the government opposite spent more than a 
billion dollars behind closed cabinet doors, undemocratically, illegally.  
And, Mr. Speaker, they're still doing it as of last week. 
 
It is therefore not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that the government's 
legislation of 1987 deliberately tried to undermine the fundamental right 
to vote and tried to pervert the democratic process for the political 
benefit only of the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, was the government guilty of arrogance or merely guilty 
of incompetence?  In the case of its undemocratic and unconstitutional 
behaviour and the electoral boundaries of 1987 which have been found to be 
unconstitutional, I submit that the government was guilty both of arrogance 
and incompetence.  Political arrogance and incompetence, and this too, Mr. 
Speaker, has continued picking up yesterday and today again where it began 
many years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have come to realize that this 
government's sense of arrogance and this government's mismanagement has 



 

 

been a recipe for disaster for the province of Saskatchewan.  It is 
important to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the government opposite was 
repeatedly warned about the shortcomings and the questionable 
constitutional validity of that legislation.  Unfortunately, it's clear to 
everyone, Mr. Speaker, that they ignored those warnings. 
 
In 1987, at the onset, the New Democrats in the legislature criticized the 
legislation and questioned its validity.  That's a matter of public record.  
The government was opposed to entertaining amendments at that time.  They 
knew best, and that's the part I'm referring to when I talk about this 
government's arrogance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the same time, 1987, an eminent Saskatchewan political scientist, 
Professor Norman Ward, also expressed grave concerns about this 
legislation, but again the government continued to ignore that advice. 
 
Then in 1988 an independent Saskatchewan constitutional lawyer also warned 
the government.  This lawyer said that this legislation is very likely 
unconstitutional, Mr. Speaker.  Then in 1989 after the British Columbia 
Supreme Court decision ruled the province's electoral boundary system to be 
undemocratic and unconstitutional, another Saskatchewan university 
professor warned the government.  Well all those warnings, Mr. Speaker, 
were ignored. 
 
Well was that incompetence, Mr. Speaker, or was it merely arrogance?  Here 
again I submit that it was both.  It was both, a dose of both.  And this 
pattern, Mr. Speaker, has continued in spades ever since 1987. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in mid-1990, almost four years into its mandate, this 
government began to feel uneasy and insecure about these boundaries and 
this legislation and referred the legislation to the Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal. 
 
One year before that, Mr. Speaker, one year before that in a Star-Phoenix 
editorial the government was warned in the following way.  This is April 
22, 1989; in fact it was over a year before that.  The Star-Phoenix 
editorial says Saskatchewan should take note.  And I just quote a couple of 
sentences here.  It says: 
 

 The British Columbia Supreme Court ruling which says that the province 
must redraw its electoral boundaries could have serious implications for 
Saskatchewan, (in bold letters) despite assurances to the contrary by both 
government and electoral officials. 

 
With the B.C. ruling as a precedent it is conceivable a court could find 
the rules governing the boundaries violate the equality provision of the 
Charter of Rights. 
 
This is a year ago and I'm quoting, Mr. Speaker, the year before the court 
decision or the decision to refer this matter to the court.  And I quote 
here: 
 

 But the Devine government would be wise to carefully consider the B.C. 



 

 

decision and possible repercussions on Saskatchewan.  Perhaps it should 
look at revising the boundary rules to ensure a court challenge doesn't 
leave the province's voters in the lurch just before election time. 

 
An Hon. Member: -- Did they listen? 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well did they listen, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from 
Moose Jaw South says?  Of course they didn't listen.  The Star-Phoenix 
editor wasn't blinded like the government opposite, Mr. Speaker.  In the 
face of evidence around us, this court decision was very predictable.  
Everyone but the Premier and his government saw the writing on the wall 
regarding its decision. 
 
Now democratic practice, Mr. Speaker, accountability and honesty, as you 
know, is important to Saskatchewan citizens.  Saskatchewan people are very 
forgiving generally, but they're not forgiving when it comes to government 
tinkering with their democracy or when the government deceives them.  I 
think Ross Thatcher and the Liberals found this out a number of years ago 
and haven't returned yet. 
 
And I think that this is a very serious matter, but the point being that 
even the Star-Phoenix, apart from political parties and the other 
constitutional experts, the Star-Phoenix saw the writing on the wall and 
predicted the true outcome of that legislation. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the court's decision -- I think it's clear to everybody 
in Saskatchewan -- was unequivocal and it was unanimous.  It stated clearly 
what Saskatchewan people knew and what the government should have known: 
that the legislation was unfair, it was undemocratic, and unconstitutional.  
And, Mr. Speaker, a number of people have said to me that that has created 
in their minds some embarrassment to Saskatchewan on the national stage, 
and they feel very concerned about that. 
 
On the day after the court decision, one Saskatchewan journalist described 
the government's actions in these terms in an article headlined -- which I 
just have here -- "Rigging electoral boundaries perverts democracy."  I'll 
just make a quick reference to this. 
 
Now this was the day after the court decision, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Star-Phoenix, March 7, 1991, by Dale Eisler, the political editorial for 
the Star-Phoenix and the Leader.  And he says, I quote: 
 

 It is simply incredible that, with a government four and a half years into 
its mandate (well beyond the tradition in this province), we now 
effectively don't have a legal electoral structure on which to hold a 
provincial election. 

 
 The Court of Appeal delivered its message in precise language without 

equivocation.  When the 54-page decision was handed down Wednesday 
afternoon, it struck like a thunderbolt from on high. 

 
 What it said was that the new boundaries were unconstitutional because 

they failed the basic test of democracy. 



 

 

 
 As such (and I'm just about finished here) the government has to bear the 

full burden of this situation.  Its attempts to rig electoral boundaries 
must be seen for what they are -- a perversion of democracy.  The court 
has . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- 
 

 The court has called the Devine Tories on what is a case of the goal of 
winning re-election justifying undermining voter equality. 

 
I'm quoting from the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Speaker.  Of undermining the 
re-election . . . undermining democracy by its own political agenda, Mr. 
Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, that is a very strong public condemnation of this 
government.  It's a condemnation that has been well earned over the past 
nine years, and well deserved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even yesterday, despite all that rhetoric about democracy, Mr. Speaker, and 
the need to be democratic, as if it's some new reality in Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan people have always been concerned about preserving democracy.  
It's a new reality to this government.  But what's important is not what 
they say, Mr. Speaker, but what they do.  And the record is quite different 
than what they say. 
 
This government has now clearly broken the public trust, Mr. Speaker.  It's 
closed, it's secretive, it's manipulative, and it's undemocratic in the 
extreme. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conclusion that the Saskatchewan people have reached is 
that this government is simply so undemocratic that, as my colleague from 
Moose Jaw South says, they've got to go.  We've got to start fresh with a 
clean slate and a whole set of meaningful, democratic reforms that begin a 
term in sincerity and in earnest and in the best interest of Saskatchewan 
people.  If we're not committed, Mr. Speaker, to the principles of 
accountability, public accountability . . . and we saw the auditor express 
major concerns about that yesterday. 
 
And I understand, Mr. Speaker, I understand, as the government was talking 
yesterday about the need for democracy as the new reality, they've been 
sitting on that auditor's report for five months, which is a very scathing 
report card.  They tried to hold that auditor's report from the public 
prior to their April election plans, which were derailed because the 
boundaries were considered unconstitutional. 
 
But the principles of accountability, of public access and input and 
participation and government openness are principles long since abandoned 
by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that unfortunately this 1987 legislation 



 

 

of these boundaries are not an isolated example.  Clearly this is part of 
an overall pattern, that we've seen since 1982, of arrogance and 
undemocratic acts by this government.  And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that 
in some ways the Premier has not accepted his accountability for this.  
This pattern of undemocratic behaviour, of arrogance and of mismanagement, 
has clearly got to be laid on the shoulders of the Premier of this 
province.  There's no doubt about that. 
 
The government members know their record is shameful, Mr. Speaker.  The 
people of Saskatchewan are rejecting this shameful record across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is the issue of elections, and surely one of the most 
central and significant features of a free and democratic society is free 
and democratic elections.  But what has been this government's approach? -- 
and I'd like the members opposite to think about this -- it holds an 
election for a Speaker.  As important as that is, Mr. Speaker, it holds an 
election for a Speaker, when the position is not even vacant and no 
election is required, at the tail-end of the mandate. 
 
Yet it refuses to hold by-elections, and has for some 16 months in 
Kindersley. But it refuses to hold by-elections when there are four 
constituencies that are vacant, and 40,000 people are denied access to the 
democratic process, to representation, in this Assembly. 
 
So that's an interesting paradox.  They hold an election for a vacancy that 
doesn't exist, and then they hold four vacancies, some 40,000 people 
without representation in the legislature of Saskatchewan.  Now that 
illustrates, Mr. Speaker, this PC government's warped sense of priorities 
when it relates to democratic practice. 
 
Or to pick another example that's very timely -- certainly today with the 
tabling of some 13 or 14 thousand petition names, again an expression of 
will from people across Saskatchewan -- if the government's really 
concerned about referendums and how the people feel, this is a clear 
expression of will by these petitions presented this morning. 
 
But this is another example where the government's unfair tax increases and 
secret spending decisions, which are cooked up behind closed cabinet doors 
and not brought before the public or before this legislature, Mr. Speaker.  
And this has been done again and again and again by this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I was pleased to see the . . . to get the minister's commitment and 
paper today regarding his intention to amend the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank him for that.  Because leaving out the requirement for public 
hearings was a major shortcoming in this Bill and one that I quite frankly 
am surprised, with the process being so botched up before, that something 
so fundamental as leaving out the requirement for public hearings would 
have been missed. 
 
But again, that isn't surprising when one considers the pattern of not 
being interested in how the public feels about . . . so it's an indication 



 

 

of being out of touch and that the public hearing portion wasn't a priority 
for the government.  Having said that, I do thank the minister for his 
commitment to co-operate with us in ensuring that that be amended 
accordingly. 
 
The record of arrogance and incompetence by this government, Mr. Speaker, 
as I said earlier, that is an example, that is a record that there are many 
examples to.  And I won't go on to make any more of them, but I would like 
to turn briefly to the Bill itself, and I'll just make a few comments here 
because I have another colleague who would like to speak to this. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the reason for this Bill is clearly that the government 
has to, in some way, deal with the mess that they have created.  This is 
clearly a desperate attempt to scramble, to get itself out of the mess of 
its own making.  This Bill does not reflect the long-term plan, it does not 
reflect a long-term process that Saskatchewan people could agree to in 
terms of future electoral boundaries. 
 
So it's an ad hoc Bill, Mr. Speaker, and there are many, many examples of 
that in the Bill, and I have a number of questions in committee that I'll 
want clarifications to.  So that's all I'll say about it at this point, but 
it's an ad hoc . . . it's ad hoc legislation at best. 
 
Secondly, it it noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, to note that the government has 
not included the Clerk of the Assembly on the commission, as one of the 
commissioners named in the Bill.  And this is violating a long-standing 
tradition in the province of Saskatchewan, as they did last time.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, in this case it would have been ideal, and an excellent 
opportunity for the government to show a sense of good faith and fairness, 
in that the Clerk would have allowed for some gender parity on the 
commission, which is noticeably absent from the commission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, I'm not going to talk too much about the commission itself, but the 
process, Mr. Speaker, the process is similar to a process that has been 
used by this government in other examples.  For example, their process, or 
lack of a process, that is a process of consultation and input from the 
opposition, was very evident when they did not seek our opinion or our 
concurrence on the appointment of the servants of this Assembly such as the 
Ombudsman or the Chief Commissioner or the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, 
unilateral decisions. 
 
And again if they are serious about working together -- which they keep 
saying they are -- then you would think that they would involve us in 
decisions regarding who should be on commissions or who should be servants 
of the Assembly.  But you would think that they would have learned, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The new commission, I'm not going to criticize the individuals, but I am 
very concerned that the Clerk is not on that commission.  I'm very 
concerned that all of those commissioners are from Regina, and I'm very 
concerned that they are all men.  That just does not make any sense, Mr. 
Speaker, without making reference to any of the commissioners themselves. 
 



 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the glaring omission was there was no 
requirement for public hearings, something that I just can't even 
comprehend how that was missed. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this Bill before us today symbolizes both the 
best and the worst of political democracy.  In so far as it addresses the 
fundamental issue of the right to vote and the right of every citizen to 
have his or her vote count, it deals with one of the most important rights 
of our democratic society.  But since it is a resolve of a painful and 
shameful history, Mr. Speaker, a record of arrogance and a record of 
incompetence, it also has exposed a political party that will go to any 
lengths, Mr. Speaker, to gain partisan political advantage.  That has 
typified the PC Party approach in this whole electoral process, Mr. 
Speaker.  And that's the view across Saskatchewan.  Has the government's 
record, Mr. Speaker, been one of arrogance or one of incompetence?  I think 
it is clear to Saskatchewan people that they're rejecting this government, 
Mr. Speaker, because they know that they're guilty of both.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
want to make a few remarks to express my serious reservations about Bill 
52. 
 
I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, that after the mess the government has 
made of the job of redrawing the constituency boundaries of this province, 
one would expect that they would genuinely try this time to do the job 
correctly.  In my judgement the plan the government has for redoing the job 
as embodied in Bill 52 is just not good enough. 
 
Bill 52, Mr. Speaker, does finally rectify the problem of very inequitable 
constituency boundaries in this province that we saw in the last 
constituency boundaries legislation that was forced through this Assembly 
by the government, and was happily rejected by the Court of Appeal as 
violating the principle of one person, one vote.  So at least that problem 
has now been corrected and in effect we do have the principle of one 
person, one vote, embodied in this Bill. 
 
But what I would like to emphasize this morning is that both the process 
for the establishment of commissioners and the rules that they are asked to 
follow while drawing up boundaries is sorely inadequate.  I believe that we 
need to have a group of commissioners who are as apolitical as we can 
possibly achieve, and this Bill does not accomplish that objective. 
 
First of all the names of the commissioners are being put forward by the 
government side of the Assembly without having consulted with the official 
opposition or other opposition parties not represented in the legislature.  
That is just not good enough. 
 
At the very minimum we need a process whereby all political parties in the 
province are consulted with respect to acceptable names for boundary 
commissioners prior to a piece of legislation such as Bill 52 being 



 

 

introduced into the Assembly. 
 
With all due respect to the integrity of Mr. Justice Barclay and Mr. 
Justice Malone, they clearly have, prior to their appointments as justices, 
a history of political partisanship.  I am not suggesting that they are 
unacceptable commissioners, but the process by which the government of the 
day puts their names forward to the legislature without consultation with 
all political parties in this province is unacceptable to me. 
 
I challenge the Minister of Justice to change the process now while there 
is still time to do it.  I'm sure all-party agreement on the names of 
commissioners could readily be achieved within a matter of a few days. 
 
In the future, Mr. Speaker, the practice I would prefer to see is that we 
reach all-party agreement on formal positions in our society that are seen 
to be politically neutral, and then have those persons or their designates 
fill the positions on the Electoral Boundaries Commission. 
 
Just by way of example, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see the Clerk of the 
Legislature or her designate on the boundaries commission.  The Clerk has a 
tradition of political neutrality, enjoys the confidence of all parties in 
the province, and is knowledgeable about the province. 
 
Another desirable option would be to have the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan 
or his designate on the commission.  I would far prefer to have the Chief 
Justice appointing a commissioner than having the provincial cabinet 
hand-picking the names of the boundary commissioners. 
 
I am sick of gerrymandering, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that only by 
achieving a system in which we are seen to have totally apolitical boundary 
commissioners will we resolve the problem. 
 
In addition to the process for appointing commissioners, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to make a comment about one other very important rule that is 
missing from the Bill that I believe should be there to restore faith in 
the process we are setting in motion here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe there needs to be a provision in this Bill that 
specifically states that the boundaries commission must have no regard 
whatsoever for poll by poll voting practices in previous elections, and is 
to order its staff to show the same disregard of previous election results.  
Given the history of what happened in this province during the years of the 
Liberal government, and again under the current government in 1989, such a 
provision is very important. 
 
In the case of those two previous governments, Mr. Speaker, ridings were 
drawn with a view to making them as politically desirable as possible for 
incumbent MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) and as undesirable as 
possible for the opposition party the government most feared.  And that's 
exactly, Mr. Speaker, what the government did in their last boundaries 
legislation in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- And what we need, Mr. Speaker, is a provision in 
legislation that prevents that being done again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the specific reference to the need for commissioners and staff 
and advisors of the commission to totally disregard voting results in polls 
is imperative to the work of this and all future electoral boundaries 
commissions being impartial and politically neutral. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, I am not satisfied with Bill No. 52.  Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:47 a.m. 
 


