





























































Hansard: April 29, 1991


 

 

April 29/91 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that the Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance, and the amendment thereto moved by Ms. Smart. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I had a few more remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, to make on the budget debate.  I took the opportunity over the 
supper hour to watch a little bit of the television, a little bit of the 
news, Mr. Speaker.  And as you know I was talking about the very, very 
large embarrassing deficit that the NDP (New Democratic Party) have brought 
down in Ontario today. 
 
And the media were looking for a response from the NDP in Saskatchewan.  
And, Mr. Speaker, they were hiding; the NDP were hiding.  They were hiding 
in the legislature, they were hiding in the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
halls, they were hiding in their offices, Mr. Speaker, and there was no 
response.  Even the member from Moose Jaw North was not available for 
comment.  The members from Regina were not available for comment.  They 
were hiding. 
 
Now the NDP know, Mr. Speaker, that if you come forward with no plan and 
you're going to have to do something so that you can live up to some of the 
expectations that the people have of you, and then you come up with a $9.7 
billion deficit, it's a little bit difficult for them to respond, Mr. 
Speaker.  An NDP is an NDP is an NDP. 
 
And I have gone through prior to the 5 o'clock, Mr. Speaker, examining the 
whole position of the NDP here in Saskatchewan.  I went through the fact 
that there was no agriculture plan.  I talked about the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) interview with the leader and he admitted that he 
doesn't have a plan; it's evolving as he goes along.  Then when I said, 
well if you don't have a diversification plan or an agriculture plan or 
even a deficit management plan, you might end up like you do in Ontario 
today, where they call it the mother of all deficits.  We're played and 
laid before the people of this country in the industrial heartland by the 
NDP who had no plan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they hid from the news media tonight.  Imagine.  They 
were so proud of the NDP Premier, Bob Rae, being elected in Ontario.  And 
when they were asked about his first budget, the first NDP budget in 
history in Ontario, the NDP over there put their tail between their legs 
and they hid in the hallways of the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  They 
couldn't be found . . . (inaudible) . . . 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- What's that tell you, Mr. Speaker?  What's that tell 
you about the honesty and the integrity and the strategy and the plan of 
the NDP in this province?  They hid from the legislature.  When their NDP 
colleagues bring down a budget and a huge deficit in Ontario, the NDP -- 
and I want the people of Saskatchewan to know this -- the NDP in this 
province hid.  They hid from the media and nobody would respond.  They say 
well the man from Regina Centre, who's their critic, wasn't available.  And 
then they said and the leader wasn't around, and the rest of them weren't 
ready. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't know if you watched the news, but a lot of other 
Saskatchewan people must have.  And the NDP are sitting there with their 
tails between their legs hiding out in the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  And 
now listen to the false bravado.  Listen to the false bravado.  They're 
trying to chirp it up; they're trying to applaud themselves.  But if you 
asked the media to go find any one of them to stick up for the NDP budget 
and the deficit of Ontario, you won't find them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, they not only hid there, Mr. Speaker, but I want to talk about them 
hiding again -- hiding again.  I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, the fact 
that when they were thrown out of office in 1982 -- we talked a lot about 
that time -- about the big deficits that the NDP were hiding in 
Saskatchewan.  And they hid those deficits, Mr. Speaker, just like they hid 
tonight.  When they came through and forward and looked at that big NDP 
deficit in Ontario, they couldn't be found to talk about it.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, they hid millions and literally billions of dollars from the 
public in 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact in today's numbers, Mr. Speaker, the NDP hid between between 7 and 
$8 billion, and that does not count, Mr. Speaker, that does not count, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact that they lost opportunity.  And the loss to the people 
of Saskatchewan was billions more as a result of what they did in 1974 to 
1980, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I want to talk about those deficits, Mr. Speaker.  The 
hidden deficits, the deceit -- and that's why they lost, Mr. Speaker, 
that's why they lost.  And I'm going to go through where they hid it and 
how they hid it, Mr. Speaker, and how they abused the public's trust and 
why they were knocked out of office and why they weren't returned again in 
1986, Mr. Speaker, and I say with respect, why they will not be returned to 
power in 1991, because of their deceit and their hiding of the deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hidden debt in Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, totalled over $3 billion which is over $5 billion in 1990 numbers.  
If you take what happened in 1982 in the Crown corporations, the 
Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations, you just bring it forward to 



 

 

1990 numbers.  That's $5 billion that they were hiding in the Saskatchewan 
family of Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want the public of this province to know that while that 
group over there hides today, when the real NDP come forward and bring 
forward their $9.7 billion in 1991 figures, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 when they 
brought in the deficit, there was at least $5 billion hidden in today's 
numbers in their Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker.  
And they knew it and they covered it up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just mention this to the 
public of Saskatchewan as they are on the eve of deciding whether the NDP 
deficit and its budget in Ontario is a reflection of the kind of strategy 
and the kind of plan that the NDP would administer here in Saskatchewan, 
where the Japanese people and the American people and others say, I'm not 
investing one more dime in Ontario while the NDP are there.  And that's 
what they said today.  And I quoted that before dinner. 
 
And the NDP on that side of the House have said they don't want any part of 
it.  They hid over the supper hour so nobody could talk to them about the 
budget.  And all they'll do is come in the House now, Mr. Speaker, and you 
hear those little nervous giggles.  You know, Mr. Speaker, that they have 
been faced with one of the most serious political . . . political science 
history lessons that you've seen in this country came down today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- They hid, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to talk about the 
hidden deficit, the hidden deficit that the NDP had in 1982, because the 
public's going to know again.  I haven't talked much about it since 1981-82 
when I was campaigning against them, when they lost every seat but eight. 
 
And what people recognize was that they did not just have this hidden 
deficit in the Crowns. They didn't just have a $1.5 billion deficit in the 
teachers' pension fund.  They didn't just have a $3.5 billion deficit in 
the employees' pension fund.  They had $900 million taken from the Heritage 
Fund and given to the Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations, and they 
had a deficit of $208 million in that Heritage Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the people are going to learn about all of that before they have the 
opportunity to decide.  I wonder if the NDP today in Saskatchewan are just 
like the NDP in Ontario, where the mother of all deficits was brought down 
today in the industrial heartland of this country, forecasting near $50 
billion in deficit in the next five years in Ontario.   And the national 
deficit from one year to another is only $35 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're talking about no strategy, no plan, anti-business, 
anti-agriculture, no capacity to lay out before the people what the real 
facts are.  And then if they get lucky enough to win, as they did in 
Ontario, then the real truth comes out. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back and say . . . and I'm going to look at this 
very carefully.  There was no surplus in 1982 -- no surplus.  There was a 
hidden deficit.  The province's cupboard was bare, Mr. Speaker.  In fact 
Allan Blakeney, the premier of the time himself admitted that the NDP left 
Saskatchewan in debt after the good times of the 1970s.  He admitted that.  
I'm going to quote here in just a minute in an interview in Moose Jaw. 
 
He said, Mr. Speaker, that there was not a surplus in Saskatchewan after 
the boom time of the 1970s.  He said, Mr. Speaker, that despite the fact 
that the Alberta Conservatives put $10 billion in the Heritage Fund, that 
there was no money in Saskatchewan.  I'm going to quote Allan Blakeney, the 
Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 1986: The fundamental reason for the defeat in 1982 
was the fact that the public believed that the government was well to do 
and had lots of money.  There was, in fact, not lots of money in 
Saskatchewan.  End of quote, Mr. Speaker, from Allan Blakeney, the premier 
that lost all those seats, Mr. Speaker, knew the facts and he knew the 
truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when in fact you have the premier of this province for 11 
years lose all the seats but eight and then stand in his place and stand in 
the media and say, you know what, we didn't have a surplus; there was a 
deficit in Saskatchewan. 
 
And he went on to say that was the reason for their defeat, because the 
people knew fundamentally that the NDP were hiding -- hiding the deficit, 
hiding it in the Crown corporations; hiding it, Mr. Speaker, because they 
had borrowed hundreds of millions of dollars from Americans to buy potash 
that was already here.  And isn't that interesting, Mr. Speaker, they hid 
that. 
 
They said, look at the new developments we're building.  The mines were 
already here and they went and borrowed money, bought the mines, paid too 
much for them and then never paid the interest.  They never paid the 
principal; they never paid the interest; and they hid all of that 
boondoggle in the Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations. 
 
They borrowed money to buy land from farmers, Mr. Speaker, and they hid all 
that.  They borrowed money to buy the land that we had right here.  The 
farmers owned it; the people owned it.  And the NDP, Mr. Speaker, borrowed 
money to buy the land.  Did they ever tell you the hundreds of millions of 
dollars they had to borrow to buy that land and how it cost us $20 million 
a year, year after year, just to pay the interest on all of that debt? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have not been honest with the people and like today, 
today when they hide from an NDP budget, it tells you volumes about their 
plan, their strategy, their honesty.  Frankly, Mr. Speaker, it tells you 
about their dishonesty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to go through the rest of the 
hidden deficit that the NDP had -- admitted by Allan Blakeney to be a fact.  



 

 

The NDP government invested $4.95 million in an Ontario based high-tech 
computer company.  They're talking, Mr. Speaker, as you can hear them. 
 
They talk about Ontario, Mr. Speaker.  They talk about Ontario.  If they're 
going to talk about me, they talk about Ontario Conservatives or they'll 
talk about the federal government that have a Conservative government.  The 
first time that the NDP win in Ontario, come down with a deficit budget 
that is the mother of all deficits, they hide. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when they talk about mistakes, what do they talk about?  
Hey?  They don't mention a computer company that we tried to build in 
Saskatchewan that lost several million dollars, they'll bring up GigaText. 
 
Let me tell you what they hid from the people of Saskatchewan that is the 
absolute truth, that they put $4.95 million into an Ontario based high-tech 
computer company.  By 1986, this company, called Nabu, was in receivership.  
The NDP lost $4.16 million of the taxpayers' money, which in today's money 
is $5.23 million -- over $5 million in Ontario computer company, Mr. 
Speaker, that the NDP hide from the public.  They hide from the public, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to go through, item by item, as 
the NDP hid from the people the real facts.  Now I used to do a lot of this 
prior to 1982, as you know.  Well I'm starting to remind the public, 
because what reminded me was watching this boondoggle of a budget in 
Ontario, Mr. Speaker.  It's the mother of all deficits.  It could run 7 to 
$10 billion a year. 
 
(1915) 
 
And again I go back to the fact that they have no plan and they admit it.  
The CBC today interviewed the Leader of the Opposition -- no plan, no 
strategy, just elect me and I'll do good.  I want to tell you, when he was 
the deputy premier for 11 years, the kinds of things that they hid from the 
public.  I just finished. 
 
The NDP's answer to GigaText which is $5.3 million -- they lost an Ontario 
company.  They didn't even try to move it here.  They just spent it in 
Ontario and left the money.  I mean that's like them buying the mines that 
were already built.  They had no plan, no strategy, but they hid that from 
the public, Mr. Speaker.  They hid it. 
 
Let's take a look at the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, in this province when 
they bought PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company).  Now they borrowed money, 
and under the NDP the Prince Albert paper company cost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers $91,000 a day in interest -- $91,000 a day. 
 
And they hid that from the public, Mr. Speaker.  You didn't hear that in 
the 1982 budget, did you?  When they talk about all of the things that they 
were going to do they lost $91,000 a day and they hid that from the public.  
They hid over $5 billion in current dollars, Mr. Speaker, in the 



 

 

Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations and in part was the $91,000 a day 
that they were losing in PAPCO.  Operating and interest expenses from 1981 
to '85 totalled $204 million in current dollars -- $204 million in that 
company.  And they hid it from the public.  They didn't tell us. 
 
Since the sale of Weyerhaeuser, the company has paid $65 million to 
provincial coffers and employs a thousand people.  We've turned that 
around.  We've cut off the breeding of $91,000 a day, Mr. Speaker, the $204 
million, and that company employs a thousand people.  And today, Mr. 
Speaker, it's paid the province of Saskatchewan $65 million.  They hid all 
that under the covers, in the Crown corporations, and they didn't tell 
people about it.  Mr. Speaker, they went on to borrow.  They went on to 
invest and lose.  They had departments that run amok.  They couldn't manage 
the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker.  They never paid their debts. 
 
Look at this.  Look at this.  Saskatchewan Government Insurance reinsurance 
fund.  And I remember this, Mr. Speaker; I'm sure you do.  By getting SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) into the risky and costly reinsurance 
business, the NDP lost -- now listen to this number -- in one move, the NDP 
lost 38.8 million taxpayers' dollars.  That's $54.4 million in current 
dollars; $54 million in today's dollars they lost.  And they never let the 
public know, Mr. Speaker.  In addition, operating losses from '72 to '82 
total over $47.6 million, Mr. Speaker, in one Crown corporation.  That's 
$100 million loss in today's number, in the SGI.  Now we heard the reports 
of the SGI today -- profitable, running so it's a balanced budget.  And 
it's profitable with reserves so they could contribute to the public.  And 
the NDP hid 100 million in losses -- 50-some-million dollars in 
reinsurance, $46 million in operations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They had luxury bath-tubs.  To keep their bureaucrats comfortable, the NDP 
government spent $168,000 to install two bath-tubs at the CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) building in Saskatoon.  Imagine, 
Mr. Speaker.  And they were kicked right out of office when people in 
Saskatoon found the sunken bath-tub scandal -- $168,000. 
 
There's departments run amok.  And listen to this one, Mr. Speaker, this 
self-righteous NDP Party.  The NDP Party spent -- nice number -- $14.2 
million a year, 1991 dollars, in advertising the Saskatchewan family of 
Crown corporations.  Well could you believe that, Mr. Speaker.  No wonder 
they were hiding tonight.  When the news come down about the Ontario budget 
they couldn't be hid because that's what Ontario NDP are doing.  They are 
spending money like drunken sailors on welfare.  You have to make over 
$45,000 in income in Ontario or else you'd be better off on welfare now in 
Ontario. 
 
People are . . . (inaudible) . . . They couldn't believe what they saw.  
And do you know what it is, Mr. Speaker, it's exactly what we heard about 
in 1982 and now we can reveal to the public. The NDP hid tonight, the NDP 
hid the deficit in 1982 -- huge deficit -- and the NDP are hiding from 
their policy because they don't have any policy. 
 
And they think, well it's tough times to govern; it's been difficult. So 
maybe the NDP can just sort of walk in without saying anything.  Well, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, I don't think that's good enough for Saskatchewan people.  I don't 
think they have earned the right to represent rural Saskatchewan.  I know 
they haven't earned the right to represent the business community in 
economic development and diversification.  They haven't earned the right to 
defend education or health care.  We've spent twice the amount of money on 
health and education that they did and the population in this province is 
about the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We've doubled the health budget.  We've doubled the 
education budget.  And what do they do?  They hide without a plan or 
complain that we're not doing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they went on to fund everything from losses in Moose Jaw, in 
real estate . . . And I could just go through the list. Golden Acres in 
Moose Jaw -- I think the former NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) was involved in it. 
 
The NDP approved of a $435,000 loan in Moose Jaw and the loan was 
guaranteed by a group headed by none other than the NDP MLA, John Skoberg.  
I wonder if the NDP in Moose Jaw remember John Skoberg.  The motel went 
into receivership and SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) 
lost 156,000 in current dollars, the loan guarantees paid only $2,500 each, 
a settlement authorized by SEDCO, even though the net worth of the Skoberg 
group was reported to be in excess of $500,000.  And they only paid out 
2,500 to people who had put money in it. 
 
I don't hear any giggles from the Moose Jaw North member now, Mr. Speaker.  
Where's his chirping?  Where are the little giggle-giggles?  Come on, clap 
a little.  Maybe we get their attention.  Maybe the public is listening 
tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bunch, these people -- who are saying that they represent the poor, 
they represent the low income, they represent farmers, they represent 
students, they represent seniors, Mr. Speaker -- they let them all down.  
They hid from them.  And when interest rates were 22 per cent, somebody 
asked the Leader of the Opposition, the deputy premier at that time, what 
can we do, to the NDP deputy premier.  And he says, well I guess you'll 
just have to do the best you can and pay your mortgages. 
 
These people who think they stick up for the poor, what did they do for 
Moose Jaw in the 1970s?  What did the NDP MLAs do for Moose Jaw in the last 
four years, Mr. Speaker?  With respect, what did the Leader of the 
Opposition do for Riversdale in the last 20 years, Mr. Speaker?  You tell 
me what he did.  He talks.  He talks.  And what you've got, Mr. Speaker, is 
you have got people who have not been well represented.  I say with 
respect, they have been let down by their MLAs; they have been let down by 
the talk that I am there to defend the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I raise these issues tonight because what 



 

 

we got today was the truth about NDP old-time socialist philosophy, and we 
saw it in Ontario in spades.  And all of Ontario is embarrassed, and I'm 
sure even the NDP in Saskatchewan are embarrassed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's why they hid.  That's why they hid.  And they won't come forward 
with a policy.  If they had one in agriculture people wouldn't agree with 
it.  And you and I know that they are hidebound by their old philosophy; 
they don't know which way to go. 
 
We've put our policies forward.  And they say, well it's criminal; you're 
helping so much.  Then the NDP leader's on the radio this morning and 
saying, well Devine and his people don't believe in the government 
supporting agriculture.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we support agriculture.  He 
doesn't know whether to not support it, yes support, less support, fast 
support, slow support, he just needs support, Mr. Speaker.  That's why they 
clap a lot over there when he stands up. 
 
He has no policy.  He has NDP candidates admit that he has no policy.  
They're all over Saskatchewan.  The billboards in Saskatoon . . . NDP, no 
definitive plan.  Romanow . . . Oh, I can't say that, sorry, I apologize 
for that, Mr. Speaker.  The billboard says, no to the Leader of the 
Opposition.  That's what it says because there's no plan.  Everybody all 
across the province is saying, no plan.  And today what we heard, Mr. 
Speaker, was the result of a great province waking up, electing an NDP 
administration with no plan -- $10 billion deficit in six months.  Can you 
believe that? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our member has not let, from Wilkie, has not let them 
hide, Mr. Speaker, he has been doing some homework.  Our member from Wilkie 
says, you know they run around the province, and they not only complain in 
P.A. about the fertilizer plant in Moose Jaw, and they not only complain 
about the paper mill in Moose Jaw -- that's in P.A.  . . . and they do 
that; they are not fair to people.  They'll say one thing in the country 
and one thing in the city and one thing up here and one thing back there.  
They do it all the time and the people are starting to call them on it. 
 
You can't get an NDP MLA in Moose Jaw to say definitively whether they're 
for or against the fertilizer plant.  Now they say it's not an issue.  Well 
do you think they would have built it?  Do you think and do you believe and 
do the people of Moose Jaw believe that the NDP are for business, Mr. 
Speaker?  If you do a survey in this province, what will you find out about 
the NDP?  If you ask the average person in Regina or Moose Jaw, do you 
think that the NDP supports business?  Most people would say, no, they 
don't.  Or put it another way, who do you think supports business more? -- 
the Leader of the PCs or the Leader of the NDP?  They'd say the Leader of 
the PCs. 
 
Now if that's the case, Mr. Speaker, and you go and you ask them: do you 
think that business is good for Moose Jaw -- do you think that business is 
good for Moose Jaw -- The average person would say, yes, I think so.  Well 
if you put those two together, Mr. Speaker, you know why the NDP MLAs from 
Moose Jaw, or the NDP MLAs in Prince Albert or the NDP MLA in The 
Battlefords are real quiet when it comes to bacon plants, paper plants, 



 

 

fertilizer plants, when they're in their own community.  They don't dare 
stick their head up because we built them, Mr. Speaker, and they can't take 
any credit, and they'd like to be against them.  When they're talking about 
something negative they pick another community. 
 
When I'm in P.A. listening to the NDP, do you know what they talk about?  
They talk about Rafferty or they'll talk about the fertilizer plant.  And 
when I'm in Moose Jaw and if you meet somebody in the NDP they say, oh that 
paper mill in P.A., isn't that awful?  Well then don't you think that the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve more than that, Mr. Speaker?  Well our 
member from Wilkie started . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Our member, Mr. Speaker, listed a number of NDP 
promises and gave the cost estimates of each of these.  And after allowing 
the NDP an extra 334 million in spending cuts and 250 million more in oil 
royalties which is . . . I mean being very generous to say the least, 
because they're against the oil patch.  They want them to move.  They're 
against the gas industry.  They're against all business.  It's estimated 
conservatively that the NDP budget which still have an annual deficit of 
over $3 billion. 
 
Now I want to go down through some of this because they hide this from the 
public.  They never add it up.  They're out here in the country and they 
offer this.  They're going to remove all the food banks and eliminate 
poverty in one fell swoop.  Then they're going to go over here and they're 
going to diversify with government money, but they haven't taken the time 
to be straightforward with the public and add it all up. 
 
Now what did we see today, Mr. Speaker?  Somebody in Ontario added it up.  
The mother of all deficits got added up today in Ontario because they'd 
made all these funny little promises all over Ontario to every group that 
would ever come out with a picket, drive it in the ground.   And they'd 
say, oh for you, a few million dollars here, and a few million dollars 
there, and a few million dollars here.  And by George, they got elected.  
And then they had to pay the piper and, Mr. Speaker, $10 billion later in 
six months, and they are hiding. 
 
Now our member from Wilkie has added it up.  Some of the NDP promises 
include the following: $481 million to eliminate poverty; 1.2 billion to 
eliminate the public debt in 15 years; 4.5 million to hire 150 
physiotherapists; 110 million to raise the provincial share of school 
operating grants to 60 per cent; 67 million for school breakfast and lunch 
program; 60 million more for the highway program; over 430 million 
increased funding for Social Services. 
 
We're going to have ourselves a $3 billion deficit right off the bat, but 
they hide that.  They don't tell the public.  Mr. Speaker, I'm going 
through this because flip-flops and hiding and, frankly, deceit are not 
good enough for the people of Saskatchewan.  They have not come clean; they 
hid.  In 1982, they hid the deficit, Mr. Speaker.  They're hiding tonight 
when we come down with the deficit in Ontario that's awful.  When you put 



 

 

together all our province's promises, they hid the total number from the 
public and they flip-flopped and flip-flopped and flip-flopped. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me move to one other area that they're hiding from the 
public, and that's their real position with respect to Saskatchewan 
balancing our budget and harmonizing with the GST (goods and services tax).  
Listen to this, Mr. Speaker.  This is the Leader of the New Democratic 
Party in Saskatchewan on October 30, 1990: 
 

 . . . the fairest and most sensible way to proceed (this is in taxation) 
would be to harmonize the two sales taxes . . . 

 
This is the Leader of the NDP administration . . . the NDP Party in the 
House here.  Leader of the Opposition says, and let me just read it again: 
 

 . . . the fairest and most sensible way to proceed (with taxation -- and I 
put the "with taxation" in) would be to harmonize the two sales taxes . . 
. 

 
Now the leader said this in a news release on October 30.  Well what's he 
hiding from today?  October 30, 1990, same individual: "A side-by-side tax 
is preferable to a tax on tax . . ."  So he says harmonize and put them one 
on top of the other, not tax on tax, so that they're together.  You have 7 
per cent fed; 7 per cent the province, and they're harmonized.  That's what 
he suggests.  And I go on: 
 

 He (which is the Leader of the Opposition, then said on October 4, and I 
quote).  He wouldn't say whether the NDP supports harmonization, arguing 
it isn't the right time for the NDP to say how it would handle the issue. 

 
This is in the Star-Phoenix the next day.  So he puts out a press release 
that says we should harmonize and it should be parallel and there shouldn't 
be tax on tax.  And the next he's asked in Saskatoon -- and how is this for 
being right up front, open, not hiding, being careful with the public -- he 
says, "it isn't the right time for the NDP to say how it would handle the 
issue" in Saskatoon.  So he says one thing in Regina, another thing in 
Saskatoon. 
 
He goes on to say in the Star-Phoenix in March 1991, quote, he said, an NDP 
government would not be bound to a harmonized sales tax, but he refused to 
say if the change would be reversed. 
 
Well have you figured it out, sir?  Do you know what he is about to do?  
I'm sure the NDP caucus would like to know.  I'll bet you they're sitting 
there saying, if we just don't say anything or if we say a little bit of 
everything, we can probably, maybe, get elected and then we can do whatever 
we like just like we did in Ontario today, Mr. Speaker, just like they did 
in Ontario today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- When asked if the NDP would change the system back . . 
. in the meantime the government passes its harmonization plans . . . Mr. 



 

 

-- it says here his name -- was not committal.  Uncommittal -- he wouldn't 
make his . . . In the past he has refused to offer an opinion on 
harmonization. 
 
And then March 15, 1991, the NDP Finance critic . . . this is in the 
Leader-Post so I guess I can use his name: 
 

 (The) NDP finance critic Ned Shillington stated . . . (that) his party 
supported this harmonization of the two taxes, but added they would lower 
the rate. 

 
 . . . it makes much more sense to have one tax rather than two . . . 
 

Well for heaven sakes, here we got the Finance critic saying we should 
harmonize, we should have one tax, for all of those logical reasons.  
Harmonization was recommended by the Finance critic who felt it would be 
simpler to have one tax.  An NDP government would harmonize the tax but at 
a lower rate, the member said. 
 
And then he goes on to say: as far as harmonizing the two taxes, we have 
said that it would only make sense if the federal government was prepared 
to make concessions in removing items such as farm inputs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if he happens to look at the tax system today that we've 
harmonized, we have removed the farm inputs to a large extent.  So the 
Co-operators, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the chartered accountants' 
association, the consumers' association said, if you're going to have the 
GST anyway, then you should harmonize with one tax, protect the farmers and 
get the benefits of one administration, one tax collection system .  And 
you should do that. 
 
And that was recommended by the NDP Finance critic, and recommended by the 
NDP leader.  When we did it, Mr. Speaker, then they get some heat.  And, 
Mr. Speaker then . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the Assembly to introduce 
some guests who are here tonight. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce Regina's 
63rd unit of Scouts who are visiting the legislature tonight and who are 
sitting in your gallery.  They are accompanied by their leader, Mr. Kirk 
Hangelmann.  And I will be meeting with the Scouts in a few minutes to take 
pictures and have drinks and to try to answer any questions that they have.  
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that the Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance, and the amendment thereto moved by Ms. Smart. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I draw to your attention and to the 
public's attention tonight again, the fact that the NDP Party and the NDP 
leader are faced with a serious, serious problem of believability and 
credibility when it comes to the Saskatchewan public.  They hid from the 
Ontario deficit.  They hid the real deficit of 1982, Mr. Speaker.  They've 
hid the promises that they've offered to people all over the province. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, they hid their real intentions from the public 
because they flip-flopped on management, on policy, on harmonization.  Mr. 
Speaker, you can just about find any particular policy or any particular 
position on any item you want to find from every corner conceivably in your 
imagination from that group over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be almost laughable except for what we saw today.  
The fact is today, Mr. Speaker, the truth came home to North American 
people and to the world.  The Japanese saw it when the NDP administration 
brought down their budget in Ontario.  The whole world found out what 
they're really like.  They don't have a plan in forestry.  They don't have 
a plan in agriculture.  They don't have a strategy for business 
diversification.  They don't have it in high technology and information. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that for example they didn't want to trade, Mr. 
Speaker, with our North American neighbour in the United States because 
they were too big and too wealthy.  You heard that.  Too big and too 
wealthy -- can't trade with the United States.  And then we turn around, 
Mr. Speaker, and we do the trade deal.  We find out that our exports into 
the United States in agriculture are up 22 per cent last year and they were 
up 13 per cent the year before, Mr. Speaker.  Then, Mr. Speaker, we find 
out that we might even be able to have free trade with Mexico.  And they 
say, well I can't trade with Mexico because they're too poor and too small.  
So you can't trade with the United States because they're too big and too 
wealthy, and they don't want to trade with Mexico because they're too poor 
and too small. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they're just against everything.  That's why they're perfect 
in opposition.  They're absolutely perfect over there, Mr. Speaker, because 
all you get is the complaints and nipping and chewing away at the various 
kinds of things that people might do.  But they cannot, Mr. Speaker, come 
forward with a plan to say how we would do better with the United States, 
how we would trade with developing countries, how we would have 
diversification, generate a new farm program, agriculture strategy that 
really works. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, we learned today, the Saskatchewan public really learned today 
what the modern-day socialist NDP are all about.  They've been criticized 
in Ontario papers; they'll be criticized on the national news.  On the 
supper hour they were severely criticized for hiding.  Mr. Speaker, I just 
want to make the point that this will not be good enough for them to hide, 
and to maybe giggle a little bit and have a few squawks and a little bit of 
bravado. 
 
But when it comes time to vote in this province, people are going to say, I 
wonder who's really on my side, I wonder what leader will really be there 
to protect my farm, I wonder what leader will really be there to protect me 
against high interest rates, and I wonder, Mr. Speaker, those voters are 
going to sit back and say I wonder who could really build and develop in 
downtown Regina or downtown Saskatoon. 
 
Who could really build an agricultural college or who could diversify in 
terms of rural gas?  Who could build water projects?  Who could build my 
community?  I mean we saw last night, as I mentioned before 5 o'clock, Mr. 
Speaker, the national Venture program covering Kindersley, Saskatchewan and 
community development bonds. 
 
Our Minister of Diversification and Trade, Mr. Speaker, has been working on 
community development bonds all over the province, and I think we've got 
about 50 of them prepared to go and another 50 that are lined up, so we'll 
have, very soon, over 100 community development bonds, Mr. Speaker.  Now 
that's involved with co-operation with the community; nothing like that 
from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, not one single thing like that.  
Just complain, hide . . . masters of deceit, somebody just said behind me. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch one more thing with respect to 
harmonization.  It's very important that we have . . . Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker.  It's very important that we recognize what the NDP will not do, 
Mr. Speaker, when they're hiding -- when they're hiding.  They haven't told 
the business community all the facts.  Here's the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Harmonization in this province provides a tax break bonanza to the business 
community of $260 million a year.  Mr. Speaker, I haven't heard the NDP 
leader or any NDP member talk about the $260 million tax break to business 
that comes with harmonization.  I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if they're going to 
go to the chamber of commerce and the boards of trade and to the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and all the organizations that are looking forward 
to the harmonization in getting the full refund on the tax; whether they're 
going to say, we won't do it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to call their bluff.  I'm going to ask them 
tonight to stand in their place and tell me that the NDP will not give the 
business community of Saskatchewan a $260 million tax break.  And you know 
they won't -- they won't.  They won't tell you one way or another.  They'll 
be against this, they'll be against that, Mr. Speaker, but by harmonization 
we get a $260 million tax break that people in Manitoba won't get the 
equivalent of, or people in B.C., or people in Ontario.  In Quebec they 
have, with a Liberal administration; in P.E.I. they will, with a Liberal 



 

 

administration.  But the NDP says, no, no, they're against business.  So 
the harmonization that would give them 100 per cent rebate, they're against 
it. 
 
If you run a retail store, you run a manufacturing operation, anything that 
you pay sales tax on in Saskatchewan will be rebated 100 per cent.  So if 
you bought a car, Mr. Speaker, and there's $1,500, Mr. Speaker, you'd get 
all of that rebated. 
 
They won't say tonight, Mr. Speaker.  They can speak from their seats and 
they can talk, but they will not tell us tonight whether they would deny 
the business community a $260 million rebate.  That allows us 
diversification and an economic competitive edge, Mr. Speaker, that others 
will not have, and the NDP hide from that. 
 
I raise it, Mr. Speaker, because our Finance minister lays all that on the 
table.  He put together on budget night a plan to balance the budget -- 
fair to business, fair to farmers.  Health and education were priorities, 
Mr. Speaker.  And he even went as far as to say, yes it may be difficult to 
find the money to balance the budget, but here it is and I'm going to be 
open and honest and lay it forward to the people, not hide like they did in 
Ontario, and not to hide like they do over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate our member of the 
legislature from Maple Creek for a report that she has just helped bring 
forward to me and to the cabinet, and it's called the Report of the 
Northern Economic Development Task Force.  Mr. Speaker, the members of this 
report, along with the chairman, had the opportunity to talk to hundreds 
and hundreds of people across northern Saskatchewan about what they want to 
see.  Mr. Speaker, on that committee and that task force that travelled 
around Saskatchewan was the member of the legislature from Maple Creek and 
. . . Listen to the following, Mr. Speaker, and I want the member from 
Cumberland and the member from Athabasca to listen to this and I'm sure 
they will.  Louis Bear was there, Mr. Speaker, and . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have listened patiently and the Premier is 
being interrupted over and over and I ask the hon. members to refrain from 
interrupting him constantly.  It's very difficult to speak under those 
circumstances for anybody. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we've asked people in northern 
Saskatchewan, when the NDP were in power what kind of economic development 
did you get?  From 1971 to 1981, Mr. Speaker, we asked them.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, they said, not satisfactory.  What we looked forward to under the 
NDP was more welfare.  That's what you get in Ontario today -- more 
welfare. 
 



 

 

The people in northern Saskatchewan say, look there's a smarter way to 
spend the money.  There's a smarter way to do it, Mr. Speaker, and they 
gave us a report.  And I want to just mention the names of the people on 
this report.  Louis Bear is the mayor of Sandy Bay . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Each hon. member has the right to 
participate in the debate, and I think you'll agree with me that in this 
particular circumstance the speaker has been interrupted many times.  I 
don't think that's fair and I know you agree with me on that.  And I simply 
ask you to behave in a more parliamentarian way and allow the Premier to 
speak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I know the hon. members . . . 
When I mention names, they're a little embarrassed to know that there are 
more and more PCs in northern Saskatchewan.  But fair enough. 
 
Louis Bear, who is the mayor of Sandy Bay . . . and they say he's PC.  
Jimmy Durocher . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- My point that I want to make on this is, this is a 
non-partisan committee with non-partisan recommendations.  Now the NDP will 
make fun of it.  I will say on this committee are NDPers, Liberals, PCs, 
mayors, and others.  And they see themselves as non-partisan, and they mean 
that.  They take this report very, very seriously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Jimmy Durocher, president of the Saskatchewan Metis society, and I 
think that he has been . . . well certainly he hasn't been necessarily a PC 
candidate; I think he was Liberal.  Mel Hegland who is the mayor of La 
Ronge -- credible I would say.  Lawrence Yew who is the administrator in 
Pinehouse, and I think he's been an NDP member of the legislature. 
 
So we have taken people from all political persuasions, put it together in 
a report.  They have talked to people all over northern Saskatchewan, and 
do you know what they say, Mr. Speaker?  They say they want to see more 
diversification, more economic activity.  They want a strategy and plan for 
mining, for local participation.  They want to see local people with 
control, Mr. Speaker.  They don't want to live under the Indian Act or the 
welfare Act, or any of that.  They want to see local economic activity, Mr. 
Speaker, which is exactly the kinds of things that we have brought into the 
province of Saskatchewan.  And they're excited about that. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Speaker, you go back and you look . . . and I just give you some of the 
things that they've brought forward.  They look at the new mining to 
develop and it's positive.  The member from Saskatoon University today 
condemned uranium mining.  He condemned uranium mining.  The people that we 
talked to all across northern Saskatchewan said, we want just to be 
involved in mining and take our fair share of mining.  We don't want to 
close the mines.  And the member from Cumberland and the member from 
Athabasca must know that, and they sit in an NDP caucus that will close the 



 

 

mines.  Is not that the truth, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Why do they hide from the facts?  See.  They hide and they duck and they 
weasel back and forth, so in the South they can say one thing; in the North 
they can say something else.  Well that's not good enough for Northerners, 
Mr. Speaker; that's not good enough for Southerners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- What kind of an outfit is that?  I'll tell you what 
northern people are going to say:  give me the straight goods; I want to 
meet this committee -- and they're from all political persuasions; I am 
tired of this kind of politics; I want a plan and a strategy for sound 
economic development.  That's what they want to have. 
 
That's what you've got in this budget.  That's what you've got in this 
budget.  And over there -- no strategy, no plan, no forestry, no mining.  
The members in Saskatoon stand up and say, no more uranium mines.  Cut them 
down -- $500 million loss in revenue.  If I had to put that into the member 
from Wilkie's deficit, he'd have run up another billion dollars a year.  
Mr. Speaker, they are not credible, not credible. 
 
When you look at the changes in mining and forestry and exploration, the 
hundreds of millions of dollars that have been into northern Saskatchewan 
from the private sector alone just in economic development and exploration, 
other industries, things that they want to see happen, and the NDP offer 
them platitudes.  And what do we get?  The truth come home to roost today 
in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to wrap this up by saying the following.  I'll 
make it very, very clear.  I will say, Mr. Speaker, I will say this: that 
the members opposite, who I can have a cup of coffee with and we can have 
fun with and we can visit with, honestly disappoint me -- disappoint me and 
members of the Saskatchewan public when they will not be honest with the 
people and tell them what they're going to do. 
 
I don't think they know how devious that is.  I don't think they know how 
poorly that is in terms of a party, a once proud party with a CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) background that now could only say 
one thing in the North and another thing in the South, one thing to the 
farmer, something else to the city people, rural against urban, no plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what's happened to them?  I mean what happened to these 
people?  What we saw, Mr. Speaker, today was exactly what the Saskatchewan 
people know in their heart of hearts could happen to the province of 
Saskatchewan if in fact an NDP administration could ever bring down a 
budget and try to put a plan forward. 
 
I will say once more: our plan is clear and it's laid out.  We have 
tremendous support for agriculture and we've said it.  And even though the 
NDP disagree with it, we believe that the rural crisis deserves our 
support. 
 



 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if you ask the people all across this province, who 
most supports new businesses -- large businesses, new businesses and more 
businesses -- into this province, they say we do.  And if you ask them, is 
it a good thing to have more businesses in Regina, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw, 
Prince Albert and The Battlefords, they'll say, yes it is. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the real question before the people then is, if we are 
supporting more business and supporting agriculture and that's good for 
rural and urban, then they're going to have to make a choice, Mr. Speaker.  
Are they going to listen to the rhetoric and the hollow promises and the 
flip-flops over there?  Or are they going to say, these people on this side 
of the House have a plan that's critical for the 1990s and 21st century.  
And we have laid it out clearly in health and our record speaks for itself, 
Mr. Speaker -- doubled the budget.  We've laid it out in education with new 
institutions and doubled the budget there.  And, Mr. Speaker, we've been 
forthright to the people of Saskatchewan and said, here's how we can 
balance the budget even in difficult economic times. 
 
And we've done that, Mr. Speaker, by co-operating with the federal 
government in harmonizing a tax system that's recommended by the boards of 
trade, the chambers of commerce, the consumers' association, passing major 
benefits on to the business community, and being fair to everybody because 
it is a user-pay tax.  If you spend a lot of money then you pay; if not, 
you don't. 
 
And that's recommended by Liberals, Mr. Speaker, and frankly when you talk 
to the NDPers and their critic, they recommended it but now they flip-flop.  
It makes sense.  We've put all of that forward in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
and we've yet to see a single, solitary plan from the NDP opposition.  But 
what we got today, Mr. Speaker, was the truth out of Ontario.  That truth, 
Mr. Speaker, speaks volumes about politics and honesty and development and 
diversification in this province.  And it will speak volumes to the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say I am very proud tonight to stand in this 
legislature and endorse the budget put forward from the Finance critic from 
this side of the House because it is head and shoulders over anything I 
have ever heard from the NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As I rise to speak on 
this budget debate following the Premier, I ask myself the question: what 
would you or what would any person living resident in the province of 
Saskatchewan expect to hear from their Premier on the budget?  Would they 
expect the Premier to at least address the budget in any way whatsoever?  
Would they expect that the Premier should be up here defending the budget?  
I would think so. 
 
I would think that what this province needs more at this time than it ever 
needed before was some kind of leadership, showing a direction, a positive 
direction, for this province when we're at a stage so raptured by their 
waste and mismanagement. 
 



 

 

But what did we get, Mr. Speaker, what did we get?  I'll tell you what we 
got.  A series of ranting and raving.  Mr. Speaker, it is now 6 minutes to 
8 o'clock.  Since the time of 7 o'clock when the Premier first got on his 
feet, after supper, we heard nothing about this budget from that Premier.  
Nothing.  He's afraid to defend this budget, Mr. Speaker.  He's afraid to 
defend . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, when the Premier got on his feet before 
supper, he spoke for the first 19 minutes about the Government of Ontario 
and what was happening in Ontario.  He spoke for a total of one and a half 
minutes about the Saskatchewan budget and then he took the next eight and a 
half minutes, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the Leader of the Opposition.  And 
then the next 55 minutes, 54 minutes, putting the whole thing together 
again after supper. 
 
So in a total of about two hours that he spoke, he defended his budget for 
a complete one and a half minutes.  This is the person with the 90-second 
vision, Mr. Speaker.  This is the Premier with the 90-second vision for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier was up here winging it.  He was up here winging 
it.  He was up there winging it in the same fashion that the government has 
been winging it for the last nine years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- He is winging it because this budget that they presented 
is nothing more than a bill, a great big bill to the taxpayer for nine 
years of waste and mismanagement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that when this 
government called this session they did not bring forth a throne speech.  
They did not bring forth a throne speech.  A throne speech outlines a plan.  
Its objective is to outline a plan and put a plan forward before the people 
of Saskatchewan, that is if you have a plan.  Clearly this government has 
abdicated its role in leadership, its responsibility to the people of 
Saskatchewan -- just like the Premier did this evening-- abdicated his role 
altogether about setting a direction, and instead they're trying to make 
themselves the opposition. 
 
And it looks like what they're trying to do is make themselves the 
opposition to the government in Ontario.  Clearly the Premier wishes that 
he were in opposition.  He spoke, Mr. Premier . . . Mr. Speaker, so little 
about the budget here that . . . and so much about what happened . . . is 
going on in Ontario, it's clear to see that the Premier will never forgive 
the people of Ontario for ousting the PC government that they have had 
there for the last how many years -- 20 some years -- and putting them far 
behind in a third place behind a government that showed some vision, and 
behind a government that did not bring in any PST (provincial sales tax). 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, there's one portion, one part that I want to 
talk about in a different tone, and that is about the language that was 
used by the Premier in his speech.  And at least five times, Mr. Speaker, I 
was sad to hear him imitate or use the words coined by Saddam Hussein, 
referring to the deficit as the mother of all deficits. 
 
Now at least five times I heard the Premier say that.  I say it's wrong, 
Mr. Speaker, to associate, to do . . . play those kinds of association 
games because it's like, it's very much like associating booze with sports, 
or alcohol . . . sports with booze or . . . so that young kids are 
influenced in that fashion.  It's a kind of language, a trick in language 
that we'd like to avoid, and I was rather sad to hear the Premier connect 
the word mother with the word deficit in the same fashion -- in a negative 
fashion -- as it was used in another context earlier, about a month or two, 
and the context of war earlier this year.  I was rather displeased with 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, it was interesting, very interesting, to 
hear the Premier refer to the CBC as he built his argument against the NDP 
or against the NDP in Ontario or against the Leader of the Opposition.  
It's interesting that he used the CBC, this same CBC that he is now suing, 
Mr. Speaker -- the same Premier,-- that he is now suing for making public 
his own land flip which is costly and not in the least bit . . . quite 
costly to the public. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier did not focus on the PST because he did not want 
to admit what the PST was doing to the economy of our country and to the 
economy of our province, because he did not want to deal and did not . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order!  Would the member please 
be seated.  There are several members who wish to give a speech.  You're 
truly interrupting and making it very difficult for anybody to hear the 
member from Prince Albert.  And the guilt isn't only on one side of the 
House, and I think you should all be willing to acknowledge that.  This is 
a situation where many people are making a hollering or whatever you want 
to call it.  Now let's allow the member from Prince Albert to make his 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We heard a lot of bravado from 
the Premier a short time ago, Mr. Speaker.  We heard the Premier go back to 
some of the lines that he was using prior to the '82 election, some of the 
lines which were made up at that time and have been discredited, long time 
discredited since then.  But the Premier continues to think that he is 
still master of deception, that he could continue and use some of those 
lines.  It was very interesting that he's trying that technique once again, 
when at this time, right at this very day in the courts in Ottawa, we're 
awaiting the news to hear how the courts are dealing with the greatest 
deception that these people tried within the last year or two and one in 



 

 

which they got caught.  And I'm referring to the gerrymandering -- got 
caught on it by the courts.  Mr. Speaker, I guess that speaks for itself 
about how far deception . . . and people are willing to put up with 
deception in this country.  At some stage, the person just has to stand up 
and be taken to task for it, and that is what's happened to the Premier. 
 
The Premier referred to, in his remarks, referred to once again something 
that he'd been caught on before, and this was to the PAPCO deal.  And once 
again we heard the Premier refer to the deal and saying that the PAPCO pulp 
mill of Prince Albert, which I am quite familiar with, was losing $90,000 a 
day during the time that they were in government.  The people there 
understand full well that that pulp mill was never in that kind of a losing 
position.  But it's an interesting argument that he makes, nevertheless, 
because when the NDP were in government that pulp mill was making in the 
vicinity of $20 million to $29 million a year.  That's when the NDP were in 
government.  So when you get that argument when the PCs were in there and 
now all of a sudden they claim to be losing $90,000, I'm wondering, Mr. 
Speaker, if that's an argument for selling the pulp mill or if that's an 
argument for getting rid of the PCs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Well it turned out, Mr. Speaker, that that was an argument 
to get rid of the PCs because it was at the time that they were making that 
argument that the election came and my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake and I were elected in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Based on the stories, the falsehoods that that company was 
trying to propagate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier also referred to the northern development . . . to 
a report that he had published earlier.  You may recall, Mr. Speaker, that 
the reply to the ministerial statement from that report was given by the 
member from Cumberland, and I want to quote a couple of statements that the 
member from Cumberland, who knows what the people of the North want and 
what they need, and what their aspirations are . . . and what he had to say 
about that.  The first thing that the member mentioned was that back in 
1985 they had set up a Northern Development Advisory Council.  That's 
recorded right here in Hansard.  This is from April 24.  And the member 
indicated that: 
 

 When you look at the fact that you can subsidize liquor (and when he says 
you, he means the government over there -- when you can subsidize liquor) 
and you can subsidize whisky, and you'll subsidize wine, but you will not 
subsidize food for the children of northern Saskatchewan -- that is 
shameful. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- And the member made the statement that it was back from 
'82 and '83 to '88 that they've been studied and restudied, but what they 



 

 

need is a little action and he gave them a positive suggestion, and all 
we're hearing from them is more crowing about that they've released another 
report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said nothing about the budget and particularly as 
the Minister of Agriculture and the minister in charge of Agriculture, it 
was interesting to see that he did not defend in the least bit anything 
about their agricultural policy or the direction that they're going in 
agriculture in this province. 
 
And there's a couple of things that ought to be mentioned, some things that 
need to be brought to the record about what this government is doing or did 
to agriculture in its budget.  Let me itemize a couple of things. 
 
First of all the budget speech announced no new programs in agriculture, 
absolutely no new programs.  There was only one place that there was an 
increase in the agricultural budget, a hefty increase at that, and that is 
an increase in communications.  Which was what? -- is promotions, as my 
colleague says, promotions, propaganda, and public relations.  They 
increased that portion of the budget by $184,000 -- $184,000 more to put 
across television to tell about how little they're doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, grants to farm organizations were cut substantially by this 
budget.  It says in the budget the grants to farm organizations were cut to 
$2.2 million this year from 3.09 million last year.  That's one grant that 
was cut.  There was a cut in the CAFF program, the counselling and 
assistance for farmers program, by $92,000.  That's directly from the 
budget, Mr. Speaker.  They cut the grant to the Prairie Agricultural 
Machinery Institute, to PAMI in Humboldt.  They cut that grant by $27,000.  
Know what the people in Humboldt are saying about that?  They're saying 
that they cut the wrong grant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  --The Department of Highways, which applies to all of 
Saskatchewan, including a large part of it where . . . includes the rural 
part of Saskatchewan, was cut by 7 per cent.  This was the second year when 
there had been a cut in the Department of Highways.  The Department of 
Rural Development will lose about $10 million from last year's spending 
levels.  This is what's happening to the Department of Agriculture in this 
province.  Why is it that the Premier didn't stand up and defend these 
cuts? 
 
Capital grants to rural municipalities will be down by $7.6 million from 
last year, Mr. Speaker, and their non-capital grants were cut by $25,000.  
Even grants to the 4-H were frozen at $271,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know that in the last year that the NDP were in power, 
1982, 4-H had received 322,000?  As a result of nine years of waste and 
mismanagement, where is 4-H now with respect to this government?  They are 
down by $50,000 -- $271,000 is all the grants they get at this stage. 
 
Community pasture development -- that's going to be down by $100,000.  And 



 

 

all of this time while this is happening -- while all these grants are 
being cut because of the waste and mismanagement -- in addition to that 
hardship, farmers and every resident in Saskatchewan will be faced with a 
provincial sales tax increase, the greatest tax grab in the history of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrast the cuts to agriculture that I have just mentioned 
and itemized, taken from the document, taken from the blue book -- contrast 
that with the plan provided by my leader, the Leader of the Opposition, in 
conjunction with our agriculture critic, the member from Humboldt.  
Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with the five-point program which is available 
to every person in Saskatchewan upon request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to itemize this very briefly.  If you ask any farmer 
what is it that they would like to see most of all to help rural 
Saskatchewan, there is hardly any argument.  Every one of them will say, we 
need to be paid for our products.  Simple as that, we need to be paid for 
our products.  Just give us the value that our dollar is; link it to the 
cost of production, they tell you over and over again.  Over and over again 
they say, that's what we deserve.  And they're prepared to work for it and 
they have worked it for it and they do deserve a decent price. 
 
The first thing that we should be doing, the first point of the program is 
that we should be backing up and the Premier should be out daily asking for 
a $550 million price grain deficiency.  Not what they came back with -- 
nearly a fifth of that.  That will just not suffice.  It will not stem the 
growing tide of farm bankruptcies and farm foreclosures. 
 
We've heard this government talk a lot about GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account), Mr. Speaker.  But 
farmers are rejecting it around the province; the sign up rate is very, 
very low -- very, very low.  As a result, the government had to sweeten the 
pot somewhat.  It's changed it somewhat after a lot of opposition from the 
farmers, after a lot of opposition from the agriculture critic sitting with 
me and my colleague, after a lot of opposition by my leader, Mr. Speaker.  
They've changed it but there are still a lot of shortcomings that need to 
be eliminated in that GRIP and NISA program.  That's item number two. 
 
Item number three, Mr. Speaker, concerns debt restructuring.  Many farmers 
simply are unable to manage their debt.  Every year they go deeper and 
deeper in debt because of the combination of low prices and high interest 
rates.  They need some help with that, Mr. Speaker, and in order to get 
that help they need a breathing space.  They need a temporary breathing 
space. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- A moratorium? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- A temporary moratorium -- exactly.  A moratorium coupled 
with a debt restructuring program.  Why?  Because they need hope and you 
folks are forgetting that.  You are forgetting that farmers are losing hope 
and you need to go back and give them some kind of hope.  And fifth, Mr. 
Speaker, farmers need some relief on input costs.  And this government is 
not providing that, Mr. Speaker.  In fact they seem to be deathly silent on 



 

 

that.  And we're saying that the federal farm fuel rebate should be 
reinstated.  This would save farmers eight and a half cents per litre on 
gasoline and seven and a half cents on diesel fuel. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I mention those things because the Premier of this 
province, who also pretends to double as the Minister of Agriculture, was 
absolutely silent in his speech.  He talked for a full two hours; he said 
nothing about agriculture.  The Premier has abdicated.  The Premier so 
badly wants to be in opposition he might as well toss the keys over and get 
into opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I now want to refer to a few more items on 
the budget speech.  I want to tell you what I think this budget represents.  
After looking at the budget and noticing that we have once again another 
deficit, I see that what this budget really is, is a bill, a great big bill 
for nine years of waste and mismanagement. 
 
We have had nine years of continual preaching from the mountain top.  We 
have had nine years of losses in services.  We have had nine years of 
higher taxes -- nine years of higher taxes -- including the income tax 
increases, gas tax increases, flat tax increases, now the PST; property 
taxes have increased at the same time. 
 
(2015) 
 
We've had nine years of increased deficits.  We've had nine years of broken 
promises with respect to the taxes.  We've had nine years at which they 
tried to stage privatization and are desperately failing; it's a failed 
program.  We've had nine years during which the bond rating has been 
falling continually.  We've had nine years of increasing business 
bankruptcies, Mr. Speaker.  We've had nine years, the last four of which 
have gone into a population drain and which have ended up in cuts to 
education and health.  We've had over 80,000 people leave the province 
during this last four years, Mr. Speaker.  And of those people, 
three-quarters of them, Mr. Speaker, are under the age of 35, our brightest 
and our best. 
 
We've had nine years, Mr. Speaker, of undermining of our health system.  
We've had nine years of manipulation in education, nine years of loss of 
farm families, and  -- worst of all, Mr. Speaker, because of their waste 
and mismanagement -- a loss of hope. 
 
They may want to blame it on luck.  There was some bad luck.  They want to 
blame it on bad luck.  But you have to look at some of the statistics, Mr. 
Speaker.  Inflation during those nine years increased by 48 per cent.  It 
is interesting that during that time while inflation increased by 48 per 
cent that the revenue to the province increased by 64 per cent.  The 
revenue was still coming in, Mr. Speaker.  There was enough 
diversification, and there was enough money coming in from resources that 
it had increased at a greater rate.  The revenue to the province of 
Saskatchewan had increased at a greater rate than the rate of inflation. 



 

 

 
So why is the government in trouble?  Why is the province bankrupt?  Where 
did all the money go?  That's why people are asking that the books be 
opened, Mr. Speaker, because they want to know where all the money went.  
At that stage, Mr. Speaker, while the revenue was up 64 per cent, 
government expenditures were up nearly by 80 per cent, by nearly 80 per 
cent.  It seemed that the more they taxed, the more they wasted.  And we 
want to know exactly where it is that all the money went. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a portion of the budget that has not been 
talked about much to date, and that is the portion of the budget and how it 
affects the quality of life in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ask yourself the question: is Saskatchewan a good place to live and was it 
a good place to live?  Is it getting better?  Is it getting worse?  Ask 
yourself the question: is Saskatchewan now, after nine years of Tory 
government, a better place to live than it was in 1982?  Well you can take 
a look at all of the statistics and the statistical evidence to answer that 
question is quite clear.  We have unprecedented debt, we have higher taxes, 
and we have fewer services.  That's a commonly known fact.  Everybody knows 
that, and that's what's resulting in the record migration out of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The economic indicators of housing starts which are way down, next to nil 
this year; business activity which is down, away down; bankruptcies, 
population outflow, taxation, and debt -- it's not hard to come to a 
conclusion.  You can come to a very rapid conclusion, looking at the 
statistics, that something went wrong.  People here know that something 
went wrong. 
 
And what I want to do, Mr. Speaker, is to take a look at some other 
measures in addition to that -- quality of life measures, Mr. Speaker.  
There was a time about a year ago, Mr. Speaker, when I happened to be in 
the Melfort area, in the Melfort riding, north-eastern Saskatchewan, 
talking with some young folks.  And there was a son of a farmer who'd 
advised me that there were some of his neighbours were going broke and he 
himself wanted to get into farming.  And he saw people leaving and he asked 
me the question, why should I stay and try to save the family farm when 
it's impossible? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that question weighed very heavily on me because I was trying 
to make a point, talking with the young folks, that there is a future here.  
But he had already made up his mind from watching what was happening in 
Saskatchewan under this regime and what effect it was having on people 
around him.  And the message he was giving me is that he was feeling very 
little or no hope because conditions had gotten so bad. 
 
This was after only seven years of Tories, Mr. Speaker.  Now we're at nine.  
And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that if you asked that same person right now, 
what is the best thing that could happen to Saskatchewan, is that he would 
say, the best thing that can happen to Saskatchewan is an election be 
called right now. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about the quality of 
life and quality of life items.  There are other measures of what makes 
Saskatchewan a good place to live.  And those measures are how we spend our 
time after work, how we spend our time with our neighbours and our friends, 
how we spend our time in sports, culture, and recreation. 
 
And I want to deal briefly with what has happened in the field of sport, 
culture, and recreation in this province and what has happened to 
provincial support in the sport, culture, and recreation field.  Has it got 
better or has it got worse?  Because I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, even in 
this field, in sport, culture, and recreation, things have deteriorated. 
 
And it's not only that people in sport, culture, and recreation feel and 
know that their support from the government is worse than it was before as 
a result of nine years of waste and mismanagement, but they feel 
manipulated.  They feel terrible about being manipulated by this 
government.  What's happened is the government has lost their trust.  Why?  
Because this government has betrayed the volunteers and the professionals 
who work in sport, recreation, and culture in this province. 
 
It all started some time ago, Mr. Speaker, in '87, when they cut the 
recreation facilities grant temporarily.  In fact, it wasn't those grants 
that were cut; there were five grants that were cut at that time.  There 
was an intermunicipal recreation support grant that was cut.  There was a 
grant which helped the school children's use of non-school facilities that 
was cut.  There was an opportunities program grant, and there was a 
recreation directors' grant. 
 
There was available, for a long period of time, mostly for rural 
Saskatchewan . . . That's where most of these grants were used.  And they 
were used as seed money largely, Mr. Speaker.  They were used as the 
18-cent dollars in many cases.  Eighteen cents would produce a dollar's 
worth of work.  That would be about a rough average.  There are places 
where the multiplying effect would be even greater. 
 
These grants, Mr. Speaker, have led in this budget . . . That small cutting 
of those grants have led in this budget to a complete abdication of much 
more than just those grants.  The multicultural aspect of the budget has 
been completely eliminated. 
 
It's very interesting now, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at this budget, this 
budget document, and turn to the title page and search for a department of 
culture.  And you wonder if you might find, Mr. Speaker, if anybody might 
find in here when you search through whether there is a department of 
culture in this blue book.  The answer is no.  My colleague says there is 
not a Department of Co-ops any longer as well, which also has to do with 
quality of life. 
 
Two years ago, Mr. Speaker, this government, according to the polling, 
thought that it was so important to mention multiculturalism in their 
program that they changed the name of the department to Culture and 



 

 

Multiculturalism from culture, youth and recreation.  They did that. 
 
All of a sudden, following the polls, they've absolutely eradicated the 
name of Culture and Multiculturalism, and they've eliminated the department 
in total.  They've abdicated their responsibility to the people of 
Saskatchewan in this whole area, Mr. Speaker, absolutely abdicated.  There 
is no mention in this book of the words culture or youth or culture and 
multiculturalism in a department.  Mr. Speaker, in the year previous in the 
budget estimates there was a Department of Culture and Multiculturalism 
which had a $20 million budget.  This year it's not in the budget at all.  
They have abdicated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the minister will claim that if you look under the Family Foundation 
that they are now handling that portion of the department under the Family 
Foundation.  Mr. Speaker, what's happened is that they're so ashamed of 
what they've done to this department as a result of their waste and 
mismanagement . . . I'm certain that nobody would really want to have done 
this, but because of their waste and mismanagement, they've put this at the 
bottom rung, took it right out, and wiped it right out, and hidden a small 
portion under the Family Foundation -- a small portion of the Culture 
budget.  It is now down to $9 million in this year's budget, and that is 
down from the Family Foundation budget of last year, even.  So, Mr. 
Speaker, they've had to hide so little of what is left. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, besides it being very frustrating and puzzling to the 
people who work, the volunteers and professionals who work in these fields 
. . . And there is not a very small number of them that I might mention, 
Mr. Speaker.  There are some half a million people that are in one way or 
another affected in sport, culture, and recreation that are been affected 
by this abdication.  And they in no way feel that they had a responsibility 
or a part in playing the accumulation of the deficit which has resulted in 
this cut.  Small wonder that they are puzzled, Mr. Speaker, by the waste 
and mismanagement that caused this to happen.  And they feel very 
frustrated by it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the department has been decimated, but I must say that there's 
a couple of things that the government was not able to do.  I'll tell you 
that they were not able to kill the spirit of the Saskatchewan volunteer 
because they're fighting back.  I tell you they tried to wrestle that 
lottery money away from sports, rec, and culture but they failed in that, 
thank goodness, Mr. Speaker.  And there's one other thing they cannot 
prevent.  They cannot prevent the people from voicing their anger in this 
in the next coming election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, in arts and culture there are now 10,000 
people employed in the industry; $250 million are injected into the economy 
from that aspect.  And as I mentioned earlier, there's about 500,000 people 
involved.  Now these are the people who developed and administrated the 
sports program in all corners of the province.  These are the people who 



 

 

work in all of our recreation facilities and all the recreation programs.  
These are the people that work in the museums.  These are the people that 
work in the arts programs and the galleries and the music and dramas.  
These are the people that work in the multicultural aspect.  These are the 
people that provide a bridge for the immigrants coming to Saskatchewan.  
They're the people that retain our heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people feel betrayed by this budget because the 
government has abdicated.  They feel manipulated, Mr. Speaker, because now 
all they can do is keep responding to study after study. 
 
I'll tell you why they feel manipulated, Mr. Speaker.  If you look at the 
history of what's happened, you see this government going year after year, 
study after study after study after study.  And while they're doing the 
studying, the government in the meantime grabs the program and abandons the 
programs all together and takes it away from the budget.  The end result of 
this, Mr. Speaker, can only be one thing, and that is a lowering of the 
quality of life, a lowering of quality of life.  That's why, Mr. Speaker, a 
load of people, the volunteers and the professionals in all of these fields 
-- in sports, recreation, and culture -- although they have not been 
extremely vocal in this, they are very angry about it.  And they feel very 
disappointed that this happened. 
 
I have a few other things I want to say, Mr. Speaker, but I think there may 
be other people who want to enter this debate, so I will close with but a 
few remarks.  And I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, the effect of the 
abdication of the government. 
 
After abandoning the government role in supporting sport, culture, and 
recreation, the end result has been that Sask Sport, that corporation, has 
to do about $35 million worth of work with $30 million.  This represents a 
15 per cent cut to people in that area.  And at the same time the 
government is still looking for a 2 per cent, or over 2 per cent, for their 
lottery licence.  That's 2 per cent that they're stealing from that area, a 
2 per cent of a $100 million lottery revenue which just brings it to light 
again, Mr. Speaker, and reminds us of how the government once tried but 
failed to get at that lottery money from the volunteer sector, from the 
children of Saskatchewan, by imposing the lottery tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that this thing will not be forgotten.  This scorched 
earth policy that the government has embarked on, and the government has 
foisted on the people of Saskatchewan, will not be forgotten.  It will be 
remembered, Mr. Speaker.  It will be remembered especially come election 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won't get into any detail on 
the Ontario budget.  I think the Premier covered that extremely well, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think we're still wondering where some of the members of the 
NDP are hiding.  It was rather revealing, I thought, Mr. Speaker, that when 
the members of the media went searching for responses from the NDP on the 
Ontario budget, how they vanished into the woodwork somewhere, behind 



 

 

closed doors, no doubt.  But that's not surprising. They too must have been 
embarrassed by the performance of the NDP in Ontario.  But it's a good 
reminder for the people of this province to bear in mind as what's ahead of 
them if, heaven forbid, these people ever get a chance to be in office 
again.  Because what you saw there in Ontario today would be the strategy 
that these people would use if they ever got in power, Mr. Speaker.  At any 
rate, I think there's going to be so much said about that in the future 
that I don't need to talk about it. 
 
I would like to first of all congratulate the Finance minister, the 
minister from Weyburn, for presenting the people of Saskatchewan with a 
realistic budget.  It was a difficult process.  We took a hard look at 
absolutely everything and as you can well imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he 
had people pulling at him from all directions.  Yet the plan that he 
produced was balanced and it was fair.  It set realistic timetables, it 
protected farmers, seniors, health care, and education.  Mr. Speaker, it 
protected Saskatchewan.  It was tough where it needed to be tough, but fair 
throughout.  It was realistic, it was responsible, and it was visionary.  
It sets a course for the next three years and beyond.  No give-aways, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, just plain common sense, a stable direction. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know what to expect from this government.  We've 
held nothing back, we laid it all on the table.  I do not believe the 
people of Saskatchewan could expect the same from the party on the opposite 
benches.  From the rhetoric I've been hearing from their leader and their 
Finance critic it is obvious they offer no clear plan, they have no vision, 
and clearly they have no alternatives. 
 
I listened to the CBC radio the other morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
was amused by an exchange about the budget between the NDP Finance critic, 
the member from Regina Centre, and the CBC reporter.  The reporter was 
having trouble getting straight answers from him, but then that wasn't 
surprising considering that the NDP have no real answers when it comes to 
finances of this province.  They can't tell us their plan because they 
don't have one.  They can't share their vision because they don't have one.  
We have no idea how they would attack the deficit, except, Mr. Speaker, 
when we see what the NDP budget in Ontario declared the massive budget 
today at 9.7 billion.  We know the local NDP would take this province down 
the very same road. 
 
While the reporter was trying to get something concrete from the would-be 
Finance minister from the opposition benches -- the member from Regina 
Centre -- and she started out by asking: if elected, would your government 
take away the provincial tax, the provincial sales tax?  And the would-be 
Finance minister says, that approach we have suggested is that we need to 
take stock of where we stand; we need to look at our tax structure.  It may 
be that it isn't, it is, or that it isn't sufficient.  So that will be our 
approach. 
 
What he was saying is that he and his party stand clearly on both sides of 
the fence.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, they make it up as they go along.  They say 
one thing in northern Saskatchewan about southern Saskatchewan.  They say 
one thing in the urban ridings and say another thing in the rural ridings, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker.  They have no vision. 
 
So the reporter says, no implementation of the GST then -- that is the 
goods and services tax.  And the would-be Finance minister says, the 
increased level of taxes was brought about by a Bill which is now going 
through the legislature and will be a fact, but harmonization will not be 
in effect, and yet his leader says, they will, and then, of course, then he 
says, they won't.  Translation, Mr. Speaker, means that very much will 
change. 
 
He says that there will be no harmonization. 
 

 October 3, NDP leader Roy Romanow confirmed that if he forms the 
government (this is a quote, Mr. Speaker), he will apply the provincial 
sales tax to all products and services that would be subject to the 
(federal) GST. 

 
That's from the Shellbrook Chronicle of October 9, 1990.  So the reporter 
says, well I'm just still not hearing where the NDP can find all the money 
to pay off the deficit.  Does that mean you don't think the 3 per cent 
increases in health and education are enough?  Would you give them more, 
the reporter asked.  Of course his party has been complaining that there's 
not enough money in the budget for health and for education and 
non-government organizations and whoever else wants grants.  And according 
to the member from Saskatoon University, we should be spending another $60 
million to feed every child in every school in every community in this 
province. 
 
So the hand-picked Finance minister says, well first you have to deal with 
the runaway spending, and only then can you tackle the problem of the 
deficit itself.  It sounds a great deal like the NDP in Ontario.  So the 
reporter, persisting, then says, would you agree then, that the civil 
service is too large and the government is headed in the right direction in 
eliminating those 600 jobs?  And the would-be Finance minister says, well 
there is a problem with management, which is far too large, and the work 
force, which in many areas is too small. 
 
So the reporter then says: Well all right, give me a yes or no on this: is 
a 4 per cent, 2 per cent, 2 per cent cap on civil services wages fair?  And 
the would-be Finance minister says: The public servants have a right to 
bargain for their wages.  And let's not forget who legislated nurses back 
to work when they wouldn't bargain in 1982. 
 
Just let me add here, Mr. Speaker, that Dale Botting, the Federation of 
Independent Business, the night before had said that from the business 
perspective, and I quote: I can tell you that a 2 per cent or a 4 per cent 
cap looks pretty good compared to what I know is happening out there.  
Business chooses to hold the line on everyone so we can all have a better 
prosperity together. 
 
But back to our hand-picked Finance minister -- our would-be Finance 
minister -- he would enlarge the public service, give them raises, and 
balance the budget; he would eliminate management positions and expect 



 

 

programs to operate efficiently.  In his words, three years is a short time 
frame.  We set ourselves a goal of eliminating a deficit within the first 
four years, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  With his answers so far, it would in their 
case, never happen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at least this government has a clearly articulated plan to 
balance the budget.  We have stated how we will get there and how long it 
will take.  Our Finance minister has already set the course.  There is a 
plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The hand-picked Finance minister across the floor says he will do it in one 
extra year by increasing spending and lowering taxes.  If that's his plan, 
I think he'd better get back on his calculator and start over before the 
election is called.  But then, Mr. Speaker, you have to realize that he 
gets his marching orders from the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and 
from the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union). 
 
Those two complained about down-sizing the civil service and they want pay 
increases of 10 per cent or more.  But they expect to have all that and a 
balanced budget too. Those two complained about government advertising, but 
they spend their members' hard-earned union wages -- or rather union dues 
-- on expensive anti-government advertising.  Talk about biting the hand 
that feeds them. 
 
Where is their credibility?  Where is the fiscal credibility of the ND (New 
Democratic) Party that dances to their tune?  They accuse our government 
but they offer no alternatives, no ideas, and certainly no vision. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's extremely easy to oppose, to be part of the 
problem.  It is more difficult to be part of the solution.  And I hear no 
solutions coming from across the floor.  We are produced a budget that 
states our priorities clearly.  From my point of view as minister 
responsible for Seniors, this budget and this government continues to look 
after our elderly.  I've worked hard to maintain a level of support we give 
our seniors through the heritage program for low and middle income seniors, 
and through the Saskatchewan Income Plan.  Benefits to seniors through the 
Saskatchewan Income Plan have increased by 200 per cent since we took 
office.  And I was pleased that we were able to offer our low income 
seniors the same level of benefits again this year. 
 
Our senior population is well cared for, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  For those who 
need it, we give solid, continuous support that they can count on.  Not 
only that, we've managed to reduce the budget of the Seniors' Secretariat 
about 10 per cent while maintaining our current level of services.  This is 
good management, not waste, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just talk for a moment about the seniors' plans.  Let's look for 
instance at income security.  Increased maximum Saskatchewan Income Plan, 
that's the SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan) plan, benefits since 1982 from 
$25 under the NDP to $80 a month for singles -- that's a 220 per cent 
increase.  And from $45 a month to $135 a month for couples -- that's a 200 
per cent increase.  This compares favourably with the rate of inflation 
which increased by 44 per cent from 1982 to 1991. 



 

 

 
We introduced a senior citizens' tax reduction and increased it to $200 for 
the 1987 tax year; established a Saskatchewan pension plan in 1986 which 
now has over 52,000 people subscribing; established a senior citizens' 
heritage program in 1986 providing an annual grant of about . . . about 
70,000 low and middle income seniors' households each year.  Since 1986, 
$186.6 million in grants have been provided to Saskatchewan seniors.  An 
additional 36 million is available for 1991. 
 
In health care for seniors, we have approved over 2,500 new and replacement 
special-care home beds; expanded adult respite and day programs in 
special-care homes; increased funding for home care by 142.1 per cent -- 
that's 113.3 million in 1981-1982, to 32.2 million in 1991-1992; expanded 
physiotherapy and occupational therapy throughout the province; introduced 
a senior citizens' ambulance assistance program in 1986 which limits the 
cost to seniors to a maximum of $150 per road trip on an ambulance trip; 
implemented the computerized health card making access to the prescription 
drug plan less cumbersome for seniors and for others -- and on and on, Mr. 
Speaker -- introduced the innovative housing program for seniors in 1987; 
ensuring representation by at least one senior on the boards of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in each of the 283 local housing 
authorities.  They have an opportunity to say something, to be part of 
solving their own problems. 
 
(2045) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just a couple of others:  expanded and restructured the 
Senior Citizens' Provincial Council to improve regional and cultural 
representation; consolidated targeted seniors' programs in the Department 
of Human Resources, Labour and Employment; and this last, in October of '89 
created a seniors' secretariat as a stand alone agency reporting directly 
to the minister responsible for Seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition accuses us of waste in management.  I challenge 
them to look at my department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- We will prove them wrong.  Mr. Speaker, we are not 
unique in government.  The Family Foundation has done excellent work over 
its one and a half year history.  We have made a difference to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In last year's budget we gave some $140,000 to feed hungry children in 
Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to report that money has been 
allocated not only for last year, but for the next two years as well.  We 
act on this, Mr. Speaker.  We just don't talk like some of the other 
organizations.  And we make good use of those funds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and the people of Saskatchewan are satisfied with the partnerships we built 
in the service of our underprivileged children and to our families. 
 
Just let me talk for a moment about some of those accomplishments.  We went 
to the communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and asked them what should be done 



 

 

about child hunger.  We went to the communities and asked them what should 
be done.  We let the communities determine how best to meet the needs.  And 
this included the community taking responsibility for action.  We have 
funded these feeding programs across the province that were designed and 
developed at the community level. 
 
We talked to school boards.  We talked to community associations.  We 
talked to parents.  We talked to teachers.  We talked to principals.  We 
talked to all the people involved in what could be termed as the hunger 
problem. 
 
And we have done more to respond to child hunger.  We increased the minimum 
wage from $4.50 an hour to $5 an hour effective July 1, 1990; increased the 
social assistance rates by $10 a child, that was June 1 of 1990; and 
established school-based family centres in five urban schools -- two in 
Regina and three in Saskatoon. 
 
I want to specifically mention where this money went, Mr. Speaker.  Seven 
hundred and forty thousand dollars was addressed to child hunger in 
Saskatchewan, and as I said, we went to the communities and asked them how 
we should respond to child hunger.  We let the communities decide how best 
to meet these needs.  And this is what they told us.  As a result of what 
they told us, we gave $351,000 to the community schools nutrition program 
involving 18 schools.  These are community schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
community schools located in areas usually in the core of the city where 
there is most need.  Ninety-seven thousand, four hundred went to the 
Saskatoon child and hunger education program, 93,000 went to the Regina 
education and action on child hunger.  These are community organizations, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Sixty thousand went to the Battlefords' outreach program, 60,000 went to 
the Prince Albert community hunger program, and in those two cities -- 
North Battleford and Prince Albert -- they said, we don't have a problem 
with hunger, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They said, we have a problem with kids 
roaming the streets; we have a problem with street gangs.  This is what we 
need to address, not the hunger situation.  So we gave them the money that 
they needed to hire what they asked for. That was two street workers -- two 
in Prince Albert and two in North Battleford -- and each of these four 
people were well paid for their time and I understand are doing an 
excellent job. 
 
We gave $15,000 to the Prince Albert share a meal program; 11,000 to the 
inner-city pre-school program in Saskatoon; 10,000 to the Moose Jaw Native 
Friendship Centre, that was 10,600; 9,100 to the Regina native awareness, 
that's Chili for Children; 7,500 to the Central Regina Early Learning 
Centre; 5,600 to the Circle Project in Regina; 4,750 to the Pleasant Day 
Central School feeding program; and 4,000 to the Rainbow Youth Centre in 
Regina; 3,800 to North Battleford School Division; and $280 to the White 
Fox student council lunch program. 
 
We got a letter one day from the students at the White Fox school -- or the 
student council -- and they said, we need $280 for a lunch program for some 
children who they felt weren't getting sufficient amount of food at home, 



 

 

and could you give us some money?  We said, how much you want?  They said, 
well $280 would be just what we need.  So we sent them a cheque for $280 
and they sent a letter back saying, thanks very much, it's what we needed.  
And now the problem is well taken care of. 
 
When the Department of Culture, Multiculturalism, and Recreation and the 
consumer education side of Consumer Affairs was rolled into our Family 
Foundation, we thought at first it would change our mandate and our 
philosophy of working with and through our other government and 
non-government agencies.  But that has not proven to be the case.  In fact, 
by amalgamating these departments, we've been able to achieve significant 
savings to the taxpayer while at the same time delivering the same services 
through our other vehicles where, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan tell us that they rightly belong.  And just before I go on to 
talk about the lottery trust then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to talk for 
a moment about the family forums. 
 
One of the things that we recognized when we first established a family 
forum, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that we needed to get out into the 
communities of Saskatchewan and talk to the people about the problems they 
were having regarding their families. 
 
In other words, when we went into a small community in Saskatchewan, we 
would meet with a group of people, like 15 or 20 people representing the 
area.  There would be a teacher there; there'd be probably a minister or a 
priest; there'd be nurses there and doctors and school teachers and people 
from the community involved in social programs.  And then we would ask them 
what kind of problems were you having in your community. 
 
And of course they would say, well the usual problems like drug and alcohol 
abuse, lack of communication between parents and children, how to deal with 
elderly parents, all those sorts of problems that if we think about it, the 
problems that we all have in the 90 per cent of the population who are not 
dealing with . . . who are not involved with social services, just the 
day-to-day problems that parents have with their children and with other 
parts of the family. 
 
So we said to them, we'll give you some money to help to organize your own 
community to have a family forum.  You decide the kind of subjects that you 
want to talk about, that you think should be talked about in your 
community, and you pick the speakers that you want to come in to give the 
workshops. 
 
Well that was just over a year ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We had the first 
one a year ago last March, and over this last year we had 150 . . . well 
now we're over 150, but let's say 150 forums in this province, and 
something in the neighbourhood of, something in the neighbourhood, Mr. 
Speaker, something in the neighbourhood of 38,000 people, 38,000 people 
have attended these family forums around the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the successes of the family forums and the 
fact that they were so well received, we decided that perhaps we should now 
spend . . . concentrate a little bit more on the youth because when I went 



 

 

out and I was talking to adults I'd also at the same time be meeting with 
some of the youths, so we set up some council . . . some opportunities to 
go out and speak to youth at various parts of the province. 
 
So we picked about seven or eight centres around the province.  We were in 
La Ronge and Montmartre; we were in Yorkton; we were in  Swift Current; we 
were in Morse, and Melfort, and a variety of other places; in Regina and 
Saskatoon as well, and also North Battleford.  And we asked the youth, what 
kinds of problems are you having; what do you need to hear?  What kind of 
messages, what kind of support do you need?  An interesting thing was that 
they said to me, the biggest single problem that the youth of the province 
were having was communicating with their parents. 
 
One young lady told me, she said, you know when I was eight and nine and 
ten, they never asked my opinion about anything around the house; they 
didn't ask me what kind of a car we should buy or what colour we should 
paint the kitchen or any of those day-to-day things that we have in our 
household.  And then I was 12 and 13 and they still didn't ask my opinion 
about anything. When I was 16, 17 they still didn't ask my opinion on 
anything, and now I'm 18, they want to know what I think.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, she said, it's too late, it's too late.  She said, what we need in 
this province is some kind of a system whereby students can get workshops 
with their parents, where they can talk about communication and those 
things on day-to-day living within the household. 
 
And so as a result of that, we then set up a series of youth consultations 
and youth workshops and now we are in the process of having these 
workshops.  I've attended at least six of them, Mr. Speaker.  The last one 
was in Yorkton last weekend.  And you go there and there'll be 150 youth or 
50 youth whatever . . . I was in Swift Current one day when they had over 
300 youth from all over the province that were there for this youth 
conference. 
 
And then they break up into workshops throughout the day and they bring in 
speakers, speakers who are good at talking about communicating with 
parents; talk about all those problems that teenagers have -- how to say no 
to drugs, how to say no to alcohol, how to deal with sexual pressures, how 
to deal with the peer-group pressures that they have in schools these days. 
 
I'm finding that the youth are responding extremely well to the opportunity 
to have a workshop and bring people in and talk to them.  And what it does, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is these young people attend this conference and then 
they feel better about themselves and they go out into their community and 
then they talk to their friends about some of the things that they heard at 
this particular workshop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's working extremely well.  The youth have responded and the 
adults have responded around the province.  So I'd like to thank . . . I'd 
like to, on this opportunity, to thank the people of my department who have 
worked so hard to make these conferences work, not only the family forums 
but also the youth consultations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we amalgamated the departments of Culture, Multiculturalism 



 

 

and Recreation and the consumer education side of Consumer Affairs was 
rolled into the Family Foundation.  We thought at first that it would 
change our mandate and our philosophy of working with and through other 
government and non-government agencies but, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, 
that has not been the case.  In fact by amalgamating all these departments, 
we have been able to achieve significant savings to the taxpayer and I 
think the people of Saskatchewan are being well treated by our department. 
 
For example, by transferring the funding responsibilities for sport, 
culture, and recreation of the lottery trust fund partners we have put the 
decision making back where it belongs, the exact type of action recommended 
by Consensus Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
For several years the volunteer sector has always been asking government to 
do this.  The volunteers have said, we want to make the decisions 
concerning funding about our organization.  And in fact, Mr. Chairman, if 
you go back over the last 20 years and think about the maturity that has 
occurred in the sports, culture, recreation areas around our province, 
you'll understand why they are ready to take on the responsibility of 
funding and making their own decisions. 
 
So we got together with the Sask Sport people, the Saskatchewan Council of 
Cultural Organizations, and the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation.  In our 
discussion it came up that there probably are in the neighbourhood of 126 
organizations with professional staff.  And many of these professional 
staff, by the way, are graduates from the University of Regina training 
program and they are now working out in the community. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 1,200 organizations -- 
sport, culture, recreation organizations around the province -- who have 
been developing and maturing over the last 20 years.  And that involves 
something in the neighbourhood of 600 to 700,000 people.  When you talk 
about lottery funding you're talking about everything from Brownies to old 
timers hockey and everything in between, all the seniors organizations and 
everything else.  And they felt that it was time that they wanted to make 
the decisions about where the funding would go. 
 
Our department, of course, we decided to hang in there and our mandate 
really is policy, as well as consultation, and of course being a watch-dog.  
And as a result of the changes we have been able to maintain consultants in 
all the zones around the province so they can work with the individual 
organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by giving the responsibility for programming back to the 
volunteers in the field, organizations which already have a paid 
professional staff, they do much of the work that our department people 
were doing.  We have the opportunity to focus on our priorities. 
 
So now the Family Foundation can return to do what it does best, and that 
is be a policy-orientated agency of government that works with and through 
other agencies and advises on policies and program which affect all aspects 
of family life. 
 



 

 

We have some of the finest staff and leadership you'll find anywhere in 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And although our mandate has grown 
broader, we are glad to have made the opportunity for ourselves to do what 
we do best.  This budget, with this requirement of frozen or reduced 
funding to . . . (inaudible) . . . organizations in reducing staffing 
components has given us the opportunity to streamline and refocus in an 
area that we really need to revisit.  I thank the Minister of Finance for 
allowing us to able to do this.  It has been a difficult operation, but I 
believe a successful one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do I support the kinds of down-sizing initiatives 
that have been outlined in this budget, but I believe this government 
should be looking creatively at each and every department over the next few 
years to see if there is a way to reorganize that would make it more 
responsive to the people of Saskatchewan.  I believe we would achieve 
significant savings to the treasury as well. 
 
There's another point I'd like to add to this budget comment, and that is 
in respect to advertising.  As a media person, I know the value of it.  
Obviously the party opposite doesn't.  The members opposite complained 
about government advertising.  They called it wasteful spending and see no 
value to it.  In fact they suggest that to cut advertising would balance 
the budget. 
 
What they don't realize is that the impact that government advertising has 
on newspapers, radio and TV stations in communities right across the 
province.  Without the stabilizing factor of government, a lot of 
small-town, community weekly newspapers would die.  Not only would people 
in our smaller communities be without this vital link, there would be a lot 
of folks out of work as well. 
 
The news media is part of the life-blood of this province.  We cannot 
afford to withdraw the advertising dollars that keep it alive.  The 
economic impact of the small-town media is significant and it is important 
from the business standpoint that government support it through its 
advertising pages and not only through its editorial pages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition should know that without advertising comment 
there is no editorial comment.  It is as simple as that.  And the same 
holds true for the Regina Leader-Post, the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, the 
Yorkton Enterprise, The Four-Town Journal, or The Eston Press.  The tirade 
by the members opposite about government advertising dollars being 
misdirected is as transparent as glass. 
 
They say cut the advertising.  Well which one would you cut, the Everyone 
Wins, the health promotion, taking personal responsibility for our own 
health and for our own well-being?  Would you cut the Lights on for Life?  
Would you cut the one on family violence?  Or would you cut the one on 
breast cancer screening?  Or would you cut the one on alcohol and drug 
abuse?  Which of those would they cut? 
 
When they say, cut out government advertising, would they cut one of those?  
Government advertising supports a vital part of the small-business sector, 



 

 

while at the same time it gets important information into the hands of 
Saskatchewan people.  There is nothing wasteful or frivolous about it. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk for a moment about Fair Share 
Saskatchewan and decentralization.  The members opposite have found it very 
difficult to bring their minds around to the need to decentralization.  
They can't . . . I guess the part that really bothers me, and I think 
mystifies me, is particularly the members from Regina who can't seem to 
understand that decentralization in Regina . . . if you don't strengthen 
rural Saskatchewan, then Saskatchewan . . . Regina will be the big loser. 
 
If you lose towns like Weyburn, like Estevan, like Pangman, and all the 
communities around this province, you're going to lose . . . Regina might 
as well shut down it's . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, please.  I'd ask the member from Regina North to . . 
. Is it Regina North?  Yes, from Regina North . . . to allow the minister 
to continue his comments.  He's been interrupting him several times 
throughout the evening.  I'd ask him just to contain himself and let the 
minister continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The member from Regina North 
finds it very difficult to face the truth when he knows as well as anyone 
in this House that if we lose rural Saskatchewan, 50 per cent of the jobs 
in this city will not exist any more.  Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, he 
hasn't figured it out yet.  The member from Regina North hasn't figured it 
out yet that Regina is a service centre for southern Saskatchewan.  He 
hasn't figured out yet that his union members, the people that he worked 
for, for a long, long time, will be without work.  The truck drivers, the 
people that work in the warehouses, they'll be without a work.  Because if 
Regina doesn't have a strong service-centre orientation, we won't need 
Regina servicing southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me give you an example here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Let me give you an example.   And I think the member 
from Regina North should listen very clearly to this.  Let's take the 
federated . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order, order, order.  Order, order.  
I'd like to ask the hon. member not to refer to the other members in the 
House.  At the same time, other members in the House should pay the 
courtesy of allowing the member to give the House his remarks without loud 
interruptions.  And I believe the member knows who I'm talking about 
especially. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you.  Let's talk about the Federative 
Co-operatives in Regina.  They have a head office in Saskatoon, but the 
distribution and warehouse centre for Saskatchewan is Regina.  Regina 



 

 

region services 101 retail outlets in south-central Saskatchewan.  There 
are 340 Co-ops in western Canada, and there's a Co-op store, of course, in 
Cupar and all these other areas around there. 
 
Based on a figure of 4.5 full-time jobs for million dollars in sales in 
1989, the Co-op employed the equivalent of 1,800 full-time employees in the 
Regina region.  The actual number of jobs would be higher because the ratio 
was one-third full time, two-third part time.  The actual number of people 
employed at the Regina distribution centre was 215.  In 1989, Federated 
Co-ops was the second largest business in Saskatchewan.  The largest was 
the Wheat Pool, the 78th largest business in Canada.  So the Federated 
Co-ops is a big business. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Member for Regina North.  I 
think you've more than had your opportunity to loudly interrupt the member, 
and I'm asking you to please refrain.  Perhaps you'll have an opportunity 
to speak next; I don't know who will speak after the member, but allow the 
minister to speak at this time.  And the Minister of Finance, I'd like to 
ask him to co-operate as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, Federated Co-operatives service 101 retail 
outlets in southern Saskatchewan.  There are something in the neighbourhood 
of 87,000 jobs in this city at any one time, all right; 50 per cent of 
those jobs are directly related to servicing southern Saskatchewan.  You're 
talking about truck drivers; just imagine how many trucks leave this city 
every day going out to service southern Saskatchewan.  If we don't 
strengthen rural Saskatchewan, if we don't somehow or other get a solid 
ground base, a solid base in those communities in southern Saskatchewan, 
then Regina will not become the distribution centre . . . that it will not 
remain the distribution centre that it is today. 
 
So I think all those people who are members of the Federated Co-operatives 
and all those other truck drivers and people that work in warehouses, all 
those people who related somehow to servicing southern Saskatchewan should 
think very clearly about the motives of the NDP when it comes time to talk 
about such things as strengthening rural Saskatchewan.  Here's a comment 
from Mrs. Lucy Thompson, a citizen of Carnduff, and this appeared in the 
Oxbow Herald.  It says: 
 

 People in the oilfield, police, teachers and now third and fourth 
generation young farmers have to move to find employment.  Are government 
employees a sacred cow that don't have to move?  The media is what is 
causing the urban/rural split. 

 
Back in 1973 the member from Regina Eastview said . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, the other side of decentralization, that 
is moving people from Regina out into areas in southern Saskatchewan, the 
other side of that of course is moving people from other areas of 
government, like Ottawa, into Regina. 
 



 

 

Saskatchewan of course does not enjoy its share of federal employees, or 
expenditures on a per capita basis.  Between 1984 and 1989 Saskatchewan 
ranked last in the number of federal employees per 1,000 population.  In 
the last three years our share of federal employees actually declined from 
2.96 per cent to 2.88 per cent, while our percentage of the population is 
at 3.84 per cent. 
 
So compared to Manitoba or Nova Scotia, Saskatchewan has less than half the 
amount of federal employees per capita that those provinces have.  We also 
enjoy less than half of the expenditures on goods and services -- 
Saskatchewan's 699 million compared to Manitoba and Nova Scotia, 
substantially more.  So decentralization from Ottawa is equally important, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's important that a couple of points be made at this time.  That is: 
while all the statistics clearly point out that Saskatchewan does not 
receive its share of federal employment expenditures, and while federal 
transfer payment reductions have taken place regularly in recent years, we 
have chosen not to sit by and blame the federal government for our economic 
situation. 
 
And it was certainly good news recently, Mr. Speaker, when the Prime 
Minister named his new cabinet and had the three Westerners in prominent 
positions.  Mr. Mazankowski is the Minister of Finance, Mr. McKnight is  
 Dthe Minister of Agriculture, and Mr. Clark is Intergovernmental Affairs, 
and so you can be sure, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government is looking 
very closely at western Canada for those appointments. 
 
And while we make the case that Saskatchewan fully deserves its share of 
federal employment and spending, we must admit that the same holds true 
relatively to provincial employment and spending, with respect to the other 
communities within the province.  So that's why we have to think about it 
as a two-way street, from the East, Mr. Speaker, to Regina, and from Regina 
out to other parts of Saskatchewan.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, it's 
important that we recognize the contribution made by the Regina economic 
development corporation . . . the Regina Economic Development Authority, 
rather, which is its proper name, headed by Gordie Staseson.  It's 
important that we develop a partnership with this organization, with the 
mayor of the city, and all members of the city council, as well as the 
Economic Development Authority, so we can do these things for Regina; we 
can make a good, strong case in Ottawa for our own province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that the member for Regina South and myself have been involved in 
the Fair Share . . . a special task force that was formed for the purpose 
of providing a strong, consistent and proactive focus towards creation of 
employment opportunities in Regina, and we will do that with Regina 
Economic Development Authority. 
 
We have the following terms of reference: to plan and negotiate for major 
decentralization of federal government activities and jobs from Ottawa to 
Regina; to fast-track significant potential economic development projects 
for Regina and area; to make recommendations regarding additional measures 
that should be taken to assist Regina in accelerating economic development; 



 

 

liaise with Fair Share Saskatchewan respecting timing and other details of 
moves by provincial departments and agencies to reduce negative impacts on 
Regina; and provide information and receive recommendations from interested 
groups within Regina respecting economic development enhancement and job 
creative initiatives. 
 
Participating in the task force, in addition to Gordie Staseson, are 
Darlene Hincks, who is representing our development authority, and our 
representatives of the Association of Regina Realtors, Regina Construction 
Association, and the Regina home builders.  We've been working hard towards 
the advancement of these measures over the last two years. 
 
As your representatives to the task force can attest -- that is, the Regina 
authority -- we have completed substantial studies that provide the base 
case to support our position with the federal government.  It's clear that 
a substantial increase in federal employment and spending within 
Saskatchewan is warranted.  We have undertaken a study that clearly 
illustrates that there will be a net0cost saving to the provincial 
government from moving federal departments and agencies from Ottawa to 
Saskatchewan.  We've completed a great deal of that work.  We've undertaken 
ongoing negotiations with the federal government at a senior level over an 
extended period of time that has resulted in their indication of a 
willingness to work with us to address the issue that we're talking about 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is good plans in place to move people from Ottawa, 
government agencies from Ottawa, into Saskatchewan, and I think that's only 
important.  This province, Mr. Speaker, has unlimited potential, it always 
has had.  1935, Mr. Speaker, there were a million people in this province, 
today there are a million people.  People ask the question: where'd they 
all go?  Well they went to Alberta, they went to B.C., they went all over 
North America.  Some went to Europe.  Why did they not stay in Saskatchewan 
through all those years?  They stayed here because there weren't the jobs 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's interesting when I hear people talking today about the kids leaving 
the province and they are leaving the province.  They have left the 
province, they always will leave the province, unless we can provide them 
jobs.  Everybody I grew up with in the '50s, when the NDP were in power -- 
everybody I grew up with left this province because the NDP couldn't 
provide the kind of jobs that they wanted.  And they wanted technical-type 
jobs, they wanted engineering jobs, and there weren't any of those kinds of 
jobs here.  The NDP did nothing to develop any kind of infrastructure in 
this province.  There was no diversification.  All my friends left here in 
the '50s. 
 
Interesting enough, a little later on my two brothers-in-law also left the 
province because they're not the kind of jobs that they wanted here -- none 
whatsoever.  And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, if you had a farm and 
you had four sons on the farm and only one that's going to stay to work the 
farm, the other three had to leave.  They just didn't leave the farm, they 
left the province for the most part, Mr. Speaker, because the kind of jobs 
that they wanted were not going to be in Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
The only way that we ever have any hope of keeping the kids in this 
province is to diversify, and that's what we've been doing, Mr. Speaker.  
And I won't go into that in a great deal because it's been talked about a 
great deal over the last few years -- about diversification, about the 
upgrader here in Regina and about Weyerhaeuser and about the Saferco plant 
that's going to be built . . . that is being built now between Regina, 
Moose Jaw.  It is going to have a thousand jobs this summer and full-time 
employment; will bring in economic development of something in the 
neighbourhood of . . . I think economic activity in the neighbourhood of 
350, $400 million a year, Mr. Chairman, into this province alone. 
 
Unfortunately, the members of the opposition find it necessary to oppose 
all of those things.  But that's not surprising because when they were in 
power, when they had the opportunity to diversify, when they had the 
opportunity to create an infrastructure in this province, they didn't do 
it.  And, Mr. Speaker, not only that, but they never will do it because 
they don't know how to do it.  They don't know how to build. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, our Finance Minister, the member from Weyburn, has 
developed, with his budget and with the help of his colleagues on this side 
of the House, a plan that will work for this government for well into the 
'90s and into the 21st century, Mr. Speaker.  And I am pleased to support 
his budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I understand that according 
to the rules I have about four minutes left to me to participate in this 
budget debate.  I especially want to thank the very verbose member . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Fifteen minutes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Fifteen minutes, thank you very much.  I want to thank 
the verbose member for Regina Wascana plains for reading his speech and 
running out the clock the way he has.  But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to talk about the Saskatchewan budget!  This may come as a complete 
surprise to the members opposite who only want to talk about the Ontario 
budget.  I want to talk about the Saskatchewan budget because this is 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not Ontario. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- And I know this comes as a surprise to them because 
they want to talk about anything but the Saskatchewan budget, anything but.  
They've talked about everything else in Saskatchewan, everything else 
outside of Saskatchewan, but they haven't talked about the Saskatchewan 
budget, Mr. Speaker.  And that's what I want to talk about. 
 
I just might say, I just might say, Mr. Speaker, that I am quite prepared, 
quite prepared to defend, to defend the Ontario budget sight unseen, sight 
unseen, if they are prepared to defend 10 budgets here in Saskatchewan -- 
10 successive deficits -- if they're prepared to defend the highest income 



 

 

tax in the country, if they're prepared to defend among the highest 
property taxes in the country, if they're prepared to defend the flat tax, 
Mr. Speaker, if they're prepared to defend the GST and now the harmonized 
PST, Mr. Speaker, if they are prepared to defend cuts to the prescription 
drug plan, if they are prepared to defend cuts to the children's dental 
program, if they are prepared to defend hospital closures, Mr. Speaker, if 
they are prepared to defend millions to Allan Gregg and Nancy McLean, if 
they are prepared to defend the corruption at STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company), Mr. Speaker, if they are prepared to defend the 
millions to GigaText, and on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Yes I'm prepared to defend the Ontario budget if 
they're prepared to stand up and defend their record here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker.  That's all the people of Saskatchewan ask of them.  Why won't 
they do that?  Why haven't they done that?  Why haven't they done that in 
the four or five days of this debate, Mr. Speaker?  I say to the Premier, 
defend your record.  I say to the Premier, stand up and account for your 
record here these last nine, ten years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I wanted to talk about one of the central 
parts of the PC budget before us, and that is the minister's plan to 
balance the budget, as he says, in three years.  Now this is something that 
has been talked about by the Leader of the Opposition but I'd like to go 
into just a little bit more detail. 
 
The minister says that sound financial management means that deficit 
financing cannot and must not continue.  He says that a financial plan to 
balance the books so that we can pay down the debt.  This is welcome news 
for the people of Saskatchewan.  They're very excited and very happy about 
that because we now have an accumulated deficit of some $4.6 billion -- 
that's according to the government's accounting and I'll get into that in a 
minute, Mr. Speaker.  This year alone we are spending $500 million, half a 
billion dollars to service the public debt.  The third highest expenditure 
in Saskatchewan -- after expenditures on health, education -- is servicing 
the public debt; an expenditure item that we never had eight or nine years 
ago, Mr. Speaker.  We have it now. 
 
It's very necessary for future programs and the future health of this 
province that we find a way to get rid of the deficit, to balance the 
budget.  And if for no other reason we must do it because the time is 
coming again when the credit-rating agencies of North America will look at 
Saskatchewan and say:  how is your fiscal health?  How should we rate you?  
We are in danger of sliding again to a level that is only matched by 
Newfoundland in Canada, only matched by Newfoundland.  We are in danger, 
Mr. Speaker, the next time we want to borrow money of having to go to 
Household Finance.  That's how bad it is, Mr. Speaker, so it's very 
important that we find a way to balance the budget, to erase that deficit. 
 
Now the minister has a projection.  The minister's financial plan is to 



 

 

establish realistic and achievable objectives which guide decisions and 
planning, and he lays out a three year timetable.  He says this year's 
deficit will be 265 million, next year's deficit will be under 150 million, 
and then the following year the deficit will be eliminated.  Then he says 
we will have a balanced budget in 1983-84.  The question is, Mr. Speaker, 
how realistic is the government's plan?  How credible is the government's 
plan?  Does he have an effective plan or is it just more posturing, Mr. 
Speaker?  Are we getting the real goods or is he just saying things again, 
Mr. Speaker?  How can we tell?  For example . . . 
 
(2115) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order..  We're all interested 
in hearing the member for Regina Victoria.  In order to do that we must 
give him the opportunity, so I ask your co-operation. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to ask you: does this government 
have some previous experience in balancing the budget?  No!  No, Mr. 
Speaker, there is no direct, demonstrable experience in the past that we 
can point to, the people of Saskatchewan can point to and say, there they 
did it; there -- they balanced the budget there.  We can't do that.  
They've never done it.  Well how can we tell, then, that in fact they will 
balance the budget?  How can the government convince you that they'll 
balance the budget, having never done it before?  Having no experience, how 
can they do that? 
 
Maybe we can look at history, Mr. Speaker.  What is the history of the PC 
government's budgets?  Even though they've never balanced a budget, is the 
history of previous budgets such that we can point to their record and say 
they knew what they were doing?  Can we do that?  Can their record convince 
us? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's review the record.  Let's review the facts.  Let's strip 
away the rhetoric, and let's look at the record, Mr. Speaker.  And first of 
all, it's important to understand the PC government's records compared to 
previous governments.  Is the PC government's record, compared to previous 
governments, such that it encourages us to think: no doubt about it, 
they'll balance the budget in the future. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker.  In fact from 1947 to 1982, a period of 35 years, we had 
CCF governments, Liberal governments, NDP governments.  We had two minor 
deficits in 1961 and '62.  These deficits were minor, and we did not see 
another deficit for 20 years.  Thirty-five years of virtually no deficits 
until the PCs were elected in 1982, and we have had a deficit every year -- 
10 successive deficits from this government, Mr. Speaker.  Now does that 
convince you that they will somehow balance the budget?  No, Mr. Speaker, 
no. 
 
Let's turn to that very first budget, the very first budget that came on 
November 24 which was brought down by the minister of Finance at the time, 
Bob Andrew. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where is he now? 



 

 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- The member asks, where is he now?  He's gone on to 
Minneapolis, Mr. Speaker, to be our trade representative.  And after I've 
finished discussing some of his contributions to budget history in 
Saskatchewan, more than a few people will be raising their eyebrows about 
the logic of that appointment.  We might have been better to let him go for 
cause, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway Mr. Andrew says that, in his very first budget, he's going to have a 
combined deficit of $220 million.  He says this is a minimized and 
manageable deficit.  Let me underline that word, manageable deficit, Mr. 
Speaker.  And he goes on to say: 
 

 We intend to see that the finances of the province are managed in the same 
careful, value-conscious manner that farmers, businessmen and individuals 
have to exercise in arranging their own affairs. 

 
Isn't that wonderful, Mr. Speaker, that he would say that? 
 
Well was Mr. Andrew on the mark?  Has the deficit proven to be manageable?  
Has the government managed the finances in the province?  And I use his 
words -- in the same careful, value-conscious manner that farmers, business 
men and individuals exercise in arranging their own affairs.  Not a chance, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you have to wonder at this point, like, why did the Premier let him?  
Why did the Premier -- after 35 years of virtually no deficits here in 
Saskatchewan, and his first finance minister bringing down a deficit -- why 
didn't the Premier take him out behind the legislature building and sit him 
down and said, now look Bob, you can't do that?  We've never done that 
before.  You shouldn't run deficits at a time that the economy is going 
good and the oil prices are the highest in history.  You shouldn't do it.  
But the Premier didn't and we paid for it ever since. 
 
But does their first budget inspire you to confidence in their claim that 
they will somehow balance the budget?  No.  No, Mr. Speaker.  And so it 
goes for their second budget where Mr. Andrew had to say that.  And I quote 
him: the combined deficit will be 317 million.  "We have chosen what we 
consider to be a reasonable solution . . . we anticipate a manageable 
increase in our combined deficit." 
 
Is that what we have now?  A manageable deficit?  No, Mr. Speaker.  We have 
deficit two on top of deficit one.  Was this a reasonable solution?  No, 
Mr. Speaker.  Are people now inspired to believe the Minister of Finance in 
his claim to a balanced budget?  No, Mr. Speaker, no. 
 
And the next budget of fiscal '84-85 where Mr. Andrew predicts, or he says: 
 

 We also took the decision to allow the deficit to rise for a second year 
in succession.  This was a necessary short-term measure to counteract the 
effects of the recession.  But two years of increasing deficits are 
enough. 

 



 

 

Well we wished that he would have followed through on that.  But he says, 
he goes on to say that: 
 

 I am pleased to announce that the 1984-85 budget deficit will be $267 
million . . . 

 
 (And he says) This is a responsible step.  The deficit has been turned 

around . . . 
 

Well I'm still trying to figure out what Bob Andrew was saying that day.  
The people of Saskatchewan are still trying to figure out how he could say, 
I've got another deficit, but I've turned things around.  Maybe he meant, 
because the deficit wasn't going to be projected quite as much as it was 
the previous year, that therefore he's turning it around.  In actual fact, 
it wasn't 267 million; it turned out to be 380 million -- a slight 
miscalculation in the lexicon of the Tories record keeping, but a major, 
major mistake as far as the people of Saskatchewan was concerned, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the question is: are you convinced that the PCs know enough about 
fiscal management that we can believe them when they say they will balance 
the budget in three years?  No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then there was 1985, their fourth budget, which will be remembered for 
the flat tax and the tax on used cars and cut out the property tax rebates, 
and where he said, this is the most intelligent budget in Saskatchewan 
history.  And the people said, no, it's the dumbest budget in Saskatchewan 
history.  And there the minister of Finance said: 
 

 Overall, I am pleased to announce that the deficit has been cut . . . 
 
 Looking ahead, this government remains committed to achieving a balanced 

budget. 
 

Well this is wonderful news, but was this evidence of a government 
committed to achieving a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker?  No.  Are you 
inspired to believe the Minister of Finance now when he talks about 
balancing the budget?  No, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in 1986 . . . and I don't want to dwell on 1986.  I have a special 
footnote here.  Many members have talked about the 1986 budget.  It was 
noteworthy because we had a new Finance minister; the old one got canned, 
thank you very much -- one good decision that the Premier made.  However, 
he replaced him with someone who knew even less about what was going on.  
It was the first pre-election budget.  That was the budget, of course, 
where he projected a deficit of 389 million; it came in at 1.2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- I wish to bring to the attention . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I wish to bring to the attention of the hon. members, rule 



 

 

14(3) which reads as follows: 
 

 On the fifth of the said days, at 30 minutes before the ordinary time of 
daily adjournment, unless the debate be previously concluded, the Speaker 
shall interrupt the proceedings and, after having allowed 20 minutes for 
the mover of the Budget motion to exercise his right to close the debate, 
shall forthwith put every question necessary to dispose of the main 
motion. 

 
I have now interrupted the budget debate and recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Over the last few days I've 
had a chance to review the opposition members' comments with a view to 
looking for legitimate criticisms, some points that they may have raised 
that were worthy of responding to, Mr. Speaker, but when I look through the 
remarks and review the remarks, I find, quite frankly, there is nothing 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are all over the place.  There is no focus to the remarks.  For 
example, the Finance critic, Mr. Speaker, when I reviewed his remarks, did 
he detail on behalf of his party their financial plan for the future, Mr. 
Speaker?  Did he detail how they would balance the budget, Mr. Speaker.  
No?  In fact, I found that particularly surprising because we've heard a 
lot from the NDP over the last several months about the 10-year, or 
15-year, or 20-year plan, or about some plan anyways, Mr. Speaker, that was 
supposed to balance the budget, Mr. Speaker.  But did we hear one word 
about this so-called 15-year plan, Mr. Speaker?  And the answer is we did 
not. 
 
The Health critic, when you examine the NDP opposition Health critic's 
remarks, did they reveal their health-care policy for the '90s?  No, Mr. 
Speaker.  The forestry critic, the same thing -- no plan there.  Education, 
did we get a sense of the NDP plan for education for our young people in 
the future, Mr. Speaker, and how they will compete with the world out 
there, Mr. Speaker?  Not one word from the Education critic.  And the story 
goes on and on, Mr. Speaker.  No plan, no vision, no strategy in any of the 
areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that brings me to the opposition leader, the NDP leader's remarks on 
budget night -- no financial plan here either, Mr. Speaker.  In fact he 
talked for some 10 minutes longer than I did and yet even on the eve of an 
election, Mr. Speaker, that we all know will be coming, he did not lay out 
his party's plans for economic diversification or health or education or 
how he would stabilize and revitalize rural Saskatchewan, or about how he 
would balance the books, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think everyone was waiting and listening for what he would have to say 
about agriculture and rural Saskatchewan because it's a well-known fact, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, that of all the areas that the NDP are weak in, they are 
particularly weak in the area of agriculture and rural policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so when he got into that part of his speech that talked about 
agriculture and rural development, I think all of us sat up and listened.  
Well finally maybe we are going to hear what the NDP policy is on 
agriculture and rural Saskatchewan and how his party would stabilize and 
revitalize rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we were all sadly disappointed in agriculture.  And 
maybe it shouldn't surprise us, Mr. Speaker, because when you think about 
it, in the debate that's been going on for some several months about the 
second line of defence, and how silent the NDP were on what the second line 
of defence should be, that safety net, the new safety net, should be for 
agriculture.  There were no ideas from the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when the debate went on about the third line of defence, the NDP even 
fell more silent.  They were silent here in Saskatchewan.  They were silent 
in Ottawa.  The NDP were silent across the country.  And finally, Mr. 
Speaker, I figured out why it is the NDP were so silent on the second and 
third lines of defence, Mr. Speaker.  I realized finally that they thought 
that that was another military operation in the Gulf War, Mr. Speaker.  
That's what they thought the third line of defence was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well anyways, Mr. Speaker, we all sat up when he 
started to get into his remarks on agriculture in the budget.  It 
disappointed everyone because the key plank in his election platform was 
the debt moratorium and which he quickly wrote off as saying it wouldn't 
work anyway.  So there was his first and foremost plank, and he quickly 
wrote it off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 DWell I want to pick up on one of the points that the Leader of the 
Opposition made in his remarks about this budget.  He said it was a budget 
that did not contain, I think to use his words, a credible plan.  He used, 
to quote him again, it was a "phoney budget".  He's tried to suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that it was not believable and not credible.  And I want to pick 
up this point, and I want to talk about why the six-point financial plan -- 
that we've put before the people of Saskatchewan in this budget -- I want 
to talk about why it is credible and realistic and achievable and 
responsible and fair and reasonable, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to end up 
talking about credibility and commitment and leadership as it relates to 
the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well first of all, why is our six-point plan to balance the budget in three 
years, why is that a realistic and achievable and responsible and 
reasonable plan, Mr. Speaker?  And it's a legitimate enough question, Mr. 
Speaker, because there have been other plans -- there have been other plans 
to balance the budget, Mr. Speaker.  Obviously if they had worked we would 
not be presenting this one to the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  So it's a 
reasonable enough question.  There have been, as I said, five- and ten-year 
plans before.  Well why is it, Mr. Speaker, that this one indeed will lead 



 

 

to a balanced budget? 
 
Well first of all, our underlying assumptions are sound and they're valid 
and I would argue, Mr. Speaker, they're on the conservative side if you 
like.  On interest rates we've taken a very conservative approach in our 
estimates here.  We have not forecasted the interest rates as low as the 
federal government has in their budget -- they've been known to be off the 
mark before -- so we are forecasting here ten per cent on the short term 
and ten and three-quarters on the longer term, Mr. Speaker.  Very realistic 
interest rate predictions. 
 
What about our predictions for oil prices and other commodities, Mr. 
Speaker?  Well once again we've been very conservative and we've erred, Mr. 
Speaker, we've erred on the conservative side, so we won't get caught 
off-guard with our predictions if in fact prices do not come in as high as 
we would have expected.  Unlike Alberta -- they predicted in the case of 
oil, $23.50 a barrel, Mr. Speaker; the federal government, I think, was 
around $23.  We've put in this budget a very conservative $20.85 as it 
relates to our economic forecast, Mr. Speaker.  We're not predicating this 
budget on somehow that there'll be a bumper crop and that the price of 
wheat's going to go to $8.  No, Mr. Speaker, we haven't predicated on 
anything like that -- an average kind of crop, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the first point I would make is that this is a credible and achievable 
budget target because the assumptions underlying it are reasonable, solid, 
valid, and conservative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, why I say that this plan indeed will lead to a 
balanced budget in three years and where other plans maybe failed is that 
we have laid it out in detail.  We've laid out the specifics as how you get 
to a balanced budget in three years.  Anybody can say, I'll balance the 
books in 5 years or 10 years or 15 years, Mr. Speaker.  The trick is you've 
got to say how, and this budget details how we're going to do that. 
 
Where other plans failed, Mr. Speaker, is that they did not lay out the 
how.  We have talked here about how we're going to control the biggest cost 
in government -- wages and salaries.  And we're going to do it in a fair 
and reasonable way with the guide-lines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've talked about how we're going to control one of the other big costs in 
government; that's the cheque that we send to municipalities and 
universities and schools and hospitals -- our partners, Mr. Speaker.  Once 
again, reasonable guide-lines for the next three years. 
 
And we've talked on this budget, and part of the plan, Mr. Speaker, is 
about how we're going to cut our spending, starting right at the top with 
MLAs and cars and their salaries and grants and the number of departments 
and the size of government, decreasing the size of government by 600 
people. 
 
Another element as to why this is a very achievable plan, Mr. Speaker, is 
it speaks to the fact that part of the plan has to be a new fiscal 
federalism with the federal government, a new deal on transfers and 



 

 

equalization. 
 
A fifth point, Mr. Speaker, as to why this plan will lead to a balanced 
budget is this . . . And if there's one element I think that threw previous 
plans off the rails, it was the fact that along would come a drought or 
trade wars or some other catastrophe would beset agriculture.  It would 
necessitate ad hoc, emergency, one-time pay-outs of 100 or 300 or 500 or 
$700 million or billion dollar loan programs, Mr. Speaker, and away would 
go the budget estimates. 
 
With this new generation of farm programs that our Premier has negotiated, 
there will be no need for those emergency, one-time programs; hence, the 
budget will not get thrown off the rails, Mr. Speaker, and hence, we will 
have a balanced budget in three years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Now not all of these measures are easy.  Certainly 
lay-offs are never easy, Mr. Speaker, for the individuals involved.  But 
the final element of this budget plan, which is the one I want to speak a 
bit about tonight in the ten minutes remaining me, maybe is the most 
difficult of all and that has to do with taxes and harmonization, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have spelled out precisely where we are coming from on taxation.  We 
have harmonized and left the rate at 7 per cent.  We didn't try to kid the 
people, Mr. Speaker, and bring in a budget and drop the rate to 5 per cent 
and somehow with a debt of 4 or $5 billion, try to convince the people that 
we could somehow . . . there was manna coming from heaven, that we could 
somehow balance the books by dropping the taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We knew that and we knew we couldn't pay for $125 million in farm programs 
and still drop the rate and not have the debt and the deficit go up.  Mr. 
Speaker, this budget, these changes, difficult as they are on the taxation 
side, are all part of a plan based on solid assumptions.  The details are 
spelled out, Mr. Speaker.  It's a very credible plan and there's nothing 
phoney about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I ask you to contrast that, and I ask all hon. members to contrast 
that, with the NDP Party and the leader of the NDP.  Talk about phoney, Mr. 
Speaker, talk about incredible statements, talk about conflicting 
statements and contradictions.  My seat mate in his speech, Mr. Speaker, 
detailed 13 or 14 major policy flip-flops by the NDP leader and his party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to go into this area of harmonization a little more fully, Mr. 
Speaker, and point out the NDP policy on harmonization and the NDP 
position.  Let's go back to June of 1989, Mr. Speaker, at that time the 
Finance critic, in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, said: 
 

 If we must have a federal sales tax then we should have one sales tax in 
this country and not two. 

 



 

 

Later the same day he said and I quote again from Hansard: 
 

 But if we must have two taxes, if we must have a federal sales tax then we 
should have one sales tax in the country not two. 

 
So here we have, Mr. Speaker, the position of the NDP on harmonization, the 
position of the NDP Party -- not in the heat of an election -- in rational 
debate in this legislature about two years ago, when we weren't all on the 
eve of an election.  And no mistake, he said it twice in one day -- if 
there is going to be a federal GST, and there is, Mr. Speaker, then it 
makes sense to have one tax, Mr. Speaker.  Well that's position number one 
of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Position number two: harmonize, yes, but we should lower the rate.  On 
October he said . . . the Leader of the Opposition put out a news release 
when the GST Advisory Committee reported.  He said, adopt the committee's 
recommendation, which was to harmonize and lower the rate.  So one day we 
had a position of let's harmonize, and then when the committee came out he 
said, well harmonize, but lower the rate.  And that view was later 
confirmed in an interview with the Leader-Post. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all the time we're getting closer and closer to an 
election.  And so the NDP leader was getting colder and colder feet.  And 
that led us to position number three, as quoted in the Star-Phoenix of 
March . . . sorry, the Leader-Post, March 15, 1991: 
 

 Asked whether that means harmonization has no future under an NDP 
government, he replied: (the he being the Leader of the Opposition) "I 
don't know what other conclusion one can be led to." 

 
 But when asked if that means the NDP would change the system back if, in 

the meantime, the government passes its harmonization plans in the 
legislature . . . (the Leader of the Opposition, whose name I cannot say) 
was noncommittal (Mr. Speaker). 

 
So position number three:  I am avoiding it, I am evading it.  I'm not 
saying we don't have one -- a position that is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well position number four, if you follow up on what they've said, and it 
was in that same article.  You know, if you're not going to have 
harmonization and you need revenues, what did he say there? 
 
Well quoting again from that same article in the Leader-Post: 
 

 "We will follow other sources of raising revenue", he explained. (Mr. 
Speaker, the he being the Leader of the Opposition). 

 
Well what does that mean?  There's going to be new taxes, or he's going to 
increase the income tax, put in place a payroll tax, up the gas tax, death 
tax, succession duties?  Is that what he's got in mind, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Position number four, Mr. Speaker:  other new taxes is what he's saying, or 
raise existing taxes, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Position number 5, he wants to stick his head in the sand, Mr. Speaker.  
And when asked, when the legislature does pass the E&H (education and 
health) Bill in this legislature, would he repeal it?  Well we get position 
number 6, Mr. Speaker, and he says, maybe I'll repeal it, maybe I won't.  
He's non-committal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2145) 
 
Well I raise these, Mr. Speaker, because this party . . . this leader and 
the NDP has more positions on harmonization with the GST than a 
contortionist at the fair, Mr. Speaker.  First of all they say harmonize, 
and then they say harmonize but lower the rate.  And as we get closer to an 
election he says, I'm evading it or I don't have a position or I have a 
position but I'm not going to say.  Or no, we're not going to do any of 
those things, we're going to raise other taxes, Mr. Speaker.  And finally 
he says, well maybe I'll repeal it, maybe I won't, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I say to the members of this legislature, I 
say this kind of double-talk simply won't do.  You can't say one thing one 
day and another the next day when it comes to harmonization, Mr. Speaker, 
just because an election is coming.  You can't say one thing in Harris, 
Saskatchewan to the farmers and another thing to the Union Hall in Regina, 
Mr. Speaker.  And you can't say one thing at the Weyerhaeuser plant, Mr. 
Speaker, and another thing at the upgrader.  And you can't say one thing to 
the oil-patch executives one day and another thing on royalties the next 
day at a news conference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say to the Leader of the Opposition, the NDP Leader of the Opposition, I 
say, come clean with the public, Mr. Speaker.  I say, this is not the way 
to build the trust and respect of the people.  Tell them where you stand, 
Mr. Speaker.  I say to the NDP leader of the present day, this is not the 
party of principle of Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker.  This is not the party of 
Tommy Douglas and the principles he stood for.  Why is it that he is so 
desperate, Mr. Speaker, to win that he'll say anything, do anything for the 
vote, Mr. Speaker?  What does he take the public for, Mr. Speaker?  I say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, the public will not be duped by these flip-flops, 
these insincerities, these contradictions, and this merely saying whatever 
it takes to get the vote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are not the hallmarks of a leader, Mr. Speaker.  There is no vision 
there, Mr. Speaker.  There is no plan.  But, Mr. Speaker, their stand on 
harmonization is remarkable in another way -- an even more important way 
than what I've just outlined. 
 
The NDP leader said at a business persons' convention here in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker: that we have changed; that we know that wealth creation has to be 
part of the plan; that we have to put in place a climate conducive to 
business development.  He openly admitted that the NDP have been good on 
wealth distribution but have always been lacking in policy as it relates to 
wealth creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their position on harmonization sets them back right in their 



 

 

old ways, Mr. Speaker.  Because here was the most significant . . . and 
here is the most significant tax change that can make business more 
competitive in this province than we've seen for several decades -- not 
necessarily popular, Mr. Speaker -- but a fundamental change to the way 
business is done in this province, lowers their input costs, and makes them 
more competitive than they've ever been in their lives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when it came down to putting politics -- crass politics -- up against 
principle, Mr. Speaker, crass NDP politics won again.  They've abandoned 
any thoughts of making business more competitive, of creating wealth in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and once again politics ruled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They flirted with the right decision -- right because it's simpler, right 
because it makes our businesses more competitive -- but in the end they 
came back to their old ways.  If it's good for business, it's bad for the 
NDP.  No change here, Mr. Speaker.  No policy for the '90s.  No forward 
thinking here, Mr. Speaker.  The same old ways. 
 
It doesn't surprise us, Mr. Speaker, because the reality is you can't 
change the spots on a leopard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The NDP leader put his narrow political interests, 
his narrow party interest ahead of the economic interest and well-being of 
this province, Mr. Speaker.  And he wants to be premier, Mr. Speaker?  I 
say the public will not be duped. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is about revitalizing rural Saskatchewan, 
stabilizing our economy.  It's about balancing the books, Mr. Speaker.  
It's about preserving those things we've always considered important and 
special in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and so I urge all members to vote for 
the main  motion and to reject the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order. 
 
The division bells rang from 9:51 p.m. until 9:55 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Romanow Atkinson t 
 Prebble Anguish t 
 Rolfes Goulet t 
 Shillington Hagel t 
 Lingenfelter Pringle t 
 Tchorzewski Lyons t 
 Thompson Calvert t 
 Brockelbank Lautermilch t 
 Mitchell Trew t 



 

 

 Upshall Smart t 
 Simard Van Mulligen t 
 Kowalsky Koenker t 
 Solomon t 
-- 25 R 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order!  Order, order.  Order.  
Order! Order! Order! 
 

Nays 
 
 Devine Neudorf t 
 Muller Gerich t 
 Schmidt Swenson t 
 Klein Britton t 
 Hodgins Pickering t 
 McLeod Sauder t 
 Lane Toth t 
 Hepworth Duncan t 
 Meiklejohn Gleim t 
 Hardy McLaren t 
 Kopelchuk Baker t 
 Petersen Swan t 
 Wolfe Muirhead t 
 Martens Johnson t 
 Hopfner Gardner t 
 Martin t 
-- 31 R 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to ask the hon. members before the 
vote starts not to continuously interrupt.  I'd like to ask them for that 
courtesy.  It's difficult to conduct the vote if we have interjections.  
It's difficult for the Clerk to hear, and it isn't the way we want to 
conduct the vote. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Devine Neudorf t 
 Muller Gerich t 
 Schmidt Swenson t 
 Klein Britton t 
 Hodgins Pickering t 
 McLeod Sauder t 
 Lane Toth t 
 Hepworth Duncan t 
 Meiklejohn Gleim t 
 Hardy McLaren t 
 Kopelchuk Baker t 
 Petersen Swan t 
 Wolfe Muirhead t 
 Martens Johnson t 
 Hopfner Gardner t 
 Martin t 



 

 

-- 31 R 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm going to interrupt once more.  I'm going to 
specifically refer to the Member for Regina Elphinstone and ask for his 
co-operation especially, along with his colleagues and anybody else that 
may be contributing to the interruptions.  Especially that gentleman.  I 
depend on him for his co-operation in this matter.  The Clerk may continue. 
 

Nays 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to now interrupt at this point and I'm going to 
ask the hon. members to pay the same courtesy to the opposition. 
 
 Romanow Atkinson t 
 Prebble Anguish t 
 Rolfes Goulet t 
 Shillington Hagel t 
 Lingenfelter Pringle t 
 Tchorzewski Lyons t 
 Thompson Calvert t 
 Brockelbank Lautermilch t 
 Mitchell Trew t 
 Upshall Smart t 
 Simard Van Mulligen t 
 Kowalsky Koenker t 
 Solomon t 
-- 25 R 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 
Agriculture and Food 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 1 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:06 p.m. 
 


