





























































Hansard: June 03, 1991


 

 

June 3/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 61 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, before the break 
I talked about how this proposal for a 7 per cent provincial GST (goods and 
services tax) is a wrong tax, the wrong time, by the wrong government.  We 
dealt with the question of it being the wrong kind of tax to impose on the 
people of Saskatchewan because it's a regressive tax. 
 
And we suggested that the government should look to other sources of 
revenue if it felt that revenues was the problem rather than expenditures.  
We would suggest, and I'll go on to talk more about this, that the 
government needs to look first at its expenditures and what it is that it 
is spending money on with a view to cutting out the great amount of waste 
and mismanagement that the people of Saskatchewan have seen from this 
government over the course of the last nine years. 
 
But I'm prepared to also look at revenue sources, other sources of revenue 
that the government might entertain.  I suggested that a tougher 
government, a more patient government might be able to induce greater 
revenues from the Crown Investments Corporation, not from the traditional 
Crowns which have been stripped of dividends, but from some of the 
investments that have been made by this government. 
 
And I mentioned the Weyerhaeuser corporation, where the government gave -- 
gave -- a $248 million capital facility to Weyerhaeuser corporation of 
Tacoma, Washington, with no expectation that it should be paid back before 
30 years, no down payment.  And although this deal was consummated some 
years ago, the people of Saskatchewan have yet to realize 1 cent. 
 
And it's ironic, Mr. Speaker, ironic that at a time that we should be 
asking the people of Saskatchewan to cough up another $445 million, the 
government has the temerity, the temerity to not approach Weyerhaeuser 
corporation for one red penny, not one, Mr. Speaker.  And they could help a 
little; they could help a lot. 
 
I also suggested, Mr. Speaker, that the government needs to look at the 
royalties that it's getting from oil companies in Saskatchewan, and I 
pointed out that 10 years ago in Saskatchewan we had oil royalties of about 
one-half billion dollars, $500 million; that oil royalties this year are 
forecasted to be $252 million, one-half, one-half of what they were 10 
years ago. And I don't know of any other group in our society, in our 
province, that is paying taxes at half the rate that it was paying at 10 



 

 

years ago.  Certainly the people of Saskatchewan, the people who live here, 
the consumers of Saskatchewan, are paying more, much more, and 
notwithstanding the promises that they made prior to the election; that the 
oil companies are paying one-half of what they paid then.  We say it's time 
we had a little chat with them about further revenues from that source, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And of course I was heckled; I was heckled when I suggested that.  I was 
heckled by the Minister of Energy, the chief apologist on that side for the 
oil companies.  But we want to enter into direct negotiation with the oil 
companies, not through his apologist frame of mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other aspect of revenues that I wanted to look at is the 
question of receipts from other governments.  These are in the main, I take 
it, receipts from the federal government and amount to about $1.2 billion 
of the $4.5 billion total revenue in the budget.  And one of the concerns 
that we have expressed on this side of the House is the approach by the 
federal government in recent years to off-load some of its fiscal problems 
and fiscal mismanagement onto the provinces of Canada.  We have seen the 
federal government take the position that the federal government should be 
paying less when it comes to supporting health and education and other 
programs that are . . . where it's desirable to have some Canadian national 
standards and presence. 
 
And what's happened is that -- and it's conceded by the minister opposite 
-- that the federal government has downed or off-loaded responsibilities 
onto the province.  Yet this is a province that has said very little.  This 
is the province that has not stood up to Ottawa.  This is a province where 
the Premier is always the first to congratulate Ottawa on anything that it 
does, the first to support Ottawa on anything it does. 
 
You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that years ago when the federal 
government wanted to, to the consternation of all the Canadians, wanted to 
cut out indexing of pensions for senior citizens, this Premier supported 
them. 
 
You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that when Ottawa first came up with this 
insane notion of a 7 per cent goods and services tax, there is one Premier 
in Canada, one Premier only that supported them at that time, and supported 
them initially, and that was the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that kind of representation, it's little wonder that Ottawa is able 
to roll over the provinces and to get its way when it comes to off-loading 
fiscal responsibilities, something that has major implications for a 
budget.  And if we had a government that was tough and resolute and patient 
in its dealings with Ottawa, I venture to say that we would get more money 
out of Ottawa than has been the case with this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one area that concerns me greatly and I mentioned it 
earlier when I talked about corporation taxes.  And I want to talk about it 
now in the context of receipts from other governments.  And perhaps it's 
something that should be dealt with in taxes per se.  But this is the 
question of corporation taxes which are not now being paid by companies in 



 

 

Canada, and a share of which, a share of which, which would then go to the 
provincial government if the federal government were doing its job in terms 
of collecting taxes.  And I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
Ottawa's take from personal income taxes soared 120 per cent -- double the 
rate which the economy grew over the period since 1984 -- while sales and 
excise taxes jumped by 100 per cent.  Only corporations escaped a tax grab.  
The annual take from businesses rose by only 4 billion to 11.4 billion last 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point that I'm getting to is that it's widely acknowledged 
that there are any number of major corporations, which because of lax 
federal policies, which because of loopholes in federal tax law, are not 
paying their fair share of the tax load in Canada.  And if these 
corporations were able to pay their fair share of the tax load in Canada it 
would mean that the federal government would be less pressed to off-load 
its fiscal responsibilities on to the provinces.  It would mean that if 
these corporations paid their fair share of tax, a percentage of that would 
also go to the province and it would enhance provincial revenues. 
 
I submit that these revenues would be significant.  I submit that if the 
provincial government took the position of working with other provincial 
governments to go after Ottawa, to get tough with these corporations, we 
wouldn't see the need for a goods and services tax at the provincial level.  
We wouldn't see the need to gouge the taxpayers with another $445 million, 
Mr. Speaker, this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, in 1988 the corporate tax rate was 
reduced from 36 per cent to 28 per cent.  More than 60,000 corporations 
paid no taxes at all -- 60,000 corporations -- and they include . . . and I 
have one here, Algoma Steel, which made profits of $80 million; paid zero 
in taxes, Mr. Speaker.  Now I don't know anyone that earns a salary in 
Saskatchewan, that earns a wage, that is in that position, that's making 30 
or $40,000 or $50,000 that is able to escape paying all taxes.  Yet Algoma 
Steel with profits of 80 million was able to avoid paying taxes.  Bramalea 
Corporation -- Bramalea which is, I understand, a major holder of housing 
projects and commercial development projects, had profits of $33 million, 
paid no taxes.  Brascan Corporation, profits of $263 million, paid no 
taxes; Confederation Life Insurance, $62 million in profits, paid no taxes; 
Standard Trust Co., $13 million in taxes . . . or in profits, paid no 
taxes; Tridel Corporation, $72 million in profits, paid no taxes; Xerox 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, $74 million in profits, paid no taxes; and the list 
goes on and on and on. 
 
But in addition to contributing nothing to federal tax revenues, there were 
a number of companies who also received tax credits, and this is in 1988, 
the last year I have the information for.  Hemlo Gold Mines, Mr. Speaker -- 
mining for gold, these people were also able to mine the public because 
they made profits of $43 million, but also received a tax credit of $2.73 
million and paid not 1 cent in taxes, not 1 cent in taxes. 
 
And I don't know of any people in Saskatchewan, the major portion of the 



 

 

Saskatchewan public, who get up in the morning and go to work and they put 
in their seven or eight hours and they draw a wage and their taxes are 
deducted at source -- I don't know any of them that are able to get those 
kinds of breaks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But these companies are getting breaks from a Tory government in Ottawa, a 
Tory government with entirely the wrong priorities and a lap-dog provincial 
government that says, whatever you want to do, Mr. Mulroney, is fine with 
us; we'll go along with you.  If you want to exempt these corporations from 
taxes, so be it; if you not only want to exempt them, but give them tax 
credits on top of that, so be it, we'll go along with you. 
 
We'll go along with the Power Corporation, one of the major corporations in 
this country, which had profits of $214 million in 1988, but also received 
a $2.12 million tax credit from Ottawa and paid not one penny in taxes, not 
one penny in taxes.  Mind you, they did pay $72,000 in political donations 
to the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party, Mr. Speaker, but I wouldn't go 
so far as to draw any connection between a political contribution such as 
that and the attitudes of the federal government. 
 
But it sure gives one pause for consideration and causes one to think about 
connections that just might be there even though I won't suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that those connections are there.  But there seems to be that 
threat running throughout, that these major companies that don't pay any in 
taxes are all major contributors to the PC Party federally, Mr. Speaker.  
But I'm sure that it's just one of those coincidences in life and that 
there is no direct relationship. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, the point . . . My colleague, here, says that I'm 
being kind.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm less than charitable . . . I'm less 
than kind, though, when it comes to the perceived lack of action on the 
part of the provincial government on this matter.  That this government 
would see fit to gouge the Saskatchewan public to the extent of $445 
million, but doesn't see fit to say one word -- not one -- to Ottawa about 
these corporations that are not paying any taxes.  And I think there is an 
irony, a discrepancy that cannot escape the attention of the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they're just silent.  I mean the Minister of Finance cannot table, has 
never tabled, I'd venture to say will never table, any correspondence from 
him to his federal colleague in saying, now look . . . Who is it today?  
Who is the federal Finance . . . Look Don, why don't you take some actions 
against Bramalea and Brascan and Standard Trust Co. and Xerox Canada.  We 
note they haven't been paying any taxes and, Don, you should go after them 
and get some tax revenue because then you wouldn't have to off-load your 
problems on to the provinces.  That way we would get our share of the taxes 
too; that way we'd all be in better position; that way we wouldn't have to 
impose the 7 per cent GST, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1915) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- But, Mr. Speaker, there is no correspondence like 
that.  It's because these Tories don't believe in doing that.  These Tories 
believe -- they have this naive notion -- in this trickle-down theory.  It 
goes along something like this: that if we give lots of breaks to Brascan, 
Brascan will create jobs and wealth and will do all kinds of wonderful 
things and all the benefits will trickle down to the rest of the 
population.  So the most important thing is to support Brascan.  And if it 
means giving Brascan an unequal advantage relative to anyone else in 
society, that's what we need to do.  That's the position they take in the 
hopes it will all trickle down. 
 
Well Tommy Douglas called that the oats and sparrows theory, Mr. Speaker.  
I remember him talking about that.  He said the Tories had this theory that 
if you give all the oats to the horse, sooner or later some will be left 
behind for the sparrows to get at.  And that's what's happening here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As opposed to going after these companies and saying it's time you paid 
your fair share -- isn't that a refreshing thing that somebody's paying 
their fair share -- it's time you paid your fair share of taxes in this 
country; as opposed to saying that they're saying to the Saskatchewan 
public, there is no other alternative.  We've got to take more money out of 
your pockets; we need your money; we've got to tax you more.  And every 
time you go to buy something we're going to tax you some more because we 
really need the money. 
 
Tax kids, tax seniors, tax books, tax running shoes and blue jeans, tax 
every darn thing in the province, Mr. Speaker.  But they won't lift one 
finger to go after to Ottawa, to go after these corporations to pay their 
fair share. 
 
I tell you something, Mr. Speaker.  This government won't sit idly by.  
This party won't sit idly by.  I tell you if we're the government of 
Saskatchewan we'll tell Ottawa to start collecting from those companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- We'll tell them to start paying their fair share.  
We're not going to sit back.  We know who our friends are.  We know who's 
important to us and that's the people of Saskatchewan -- not Brascan, not 
Xerox Canada.  This old theory of the Tories that if we give favour to a 
few corporations, it'll be good for all of us, has got to be thrown out the 
window, thrown out the window with the Tory government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's time to stand up for people, Mr. Speaker.  That's what this government 
will do.  That's what this party will do in government.  We don't see the 
Tories doing that.  And it's no wonder that 80 per cent of the population 
don't support them in this sales tax because they know what's going on.  
Eighty per cent of the population is kind of asking themselves, well how 
come is it that the Royal Bank of Canada, one of the largest and most 
profitable companies in the country, gets away without paying any taxes, or 
the taxes that it pays is less than the taxes paid by one of its tellers.  
Now what kind of sense does that make?  And why is the government asking me 



 

 

for more money when it won't even ask the shareholders of the Royal Bank?  
What kind of priorities is that? 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know.  The people of Saskatchewan are not fooled 
by the arguments from the members opposite.  And I don't believe that all 
the back-benchers opposite are fooled by the arguments being put forward by 
the front bench.  They see through the suggestion of the Minister of 
Finance.  They laugh behind his back at this GST that he's putting forward, 
this last minute gouge of the taxpayers five, six months before a 
provincial election. 
 
Yes they scratch their heads too at this sort of unprecedented stupidity on 
the part of their Minister of Finance.  And they thought they had seen it 
all in terms of ministers of Finance, I mean . . . and they've had some 
dillies in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they've had some dillies.  I tell 
you, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, when some future student of political science 
or economics or public administration does a paper on finance ministers of 
Saskatchewan, I venture to say that the Tory's finance ministers will rate 
low because they're the only ones that seem to be consistently running up 
huge deficits and horribly miscalculating the state of affairs of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, and old finance ministers . . . 
but one thing about old finance ministers is they know how to look after 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first minister of Finance, Bob Andrew -- you all remember Bob with his 
great ideas, ethereal notions about how it's better to have a simulated 
deficit than to balance the budget.  Bob, who's gone on to his just rewards 
as the province's trade commissioner in Minneapolis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course the last minister of Finance is reportedly angling for an 
appointment to the Bench.  And people say here comes the judge when he 
enters the House.  But, Mr. Speaker, that's neither here nor there; that's 
not important.  What is important is that there are alternatives to the 
goods and services tax, that we don't need a provincial sales tax to be 
harmonized with a federal goods and services tax.  We don't need to gouge 
the Saskatchewan public for $445 million. 
 
We need to look at, or at least if they want to, they need to look at other 
revenues.  They need to get tough with the oil companies in Saskatchewan.  
We need to get our proper and just rewards.  We need to get our fair share.  
And they need to get tough with . . . and they need to understand that the 
place of the government isn't to give away money to out-of-province 
corporations, whether it's Cargill or Weyerhaeuser.  And they need to 
understand that there are too many companies in Canada that are not paying 
enough in taxes and that we should be going after them to pay their fair 
share before we go after the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I've dealt with the question of alternatives to the 
tax.  I want to now turn to the alternative that we would suggest the 
government take as its primary course, that is opposed to looking to 
revenues first, that the government should be looking at the question of 
how much it's spending and to see if there are ways that the government can 
reduce the expenditures of government so as to reduce the need for other 



 

 

tax revenues such as this GST, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the thing that I'm talking about of course is the need to 
eliminate waste and mismanagement in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, there's 
many examples of waste and mismanagement in Saskatchewan that have been 
raised in this Assembly and raised by the public in recent years -- 
advertising, government printing, government travel. 
 
For example, an 80 per cent cut in government advertising would save $17.6 
million; a 66 per cent cut in government printing would save another $24.6 
million; a 33 per cent cut in government travel would save taxpayers $17 
million a year. 
 
Now I know the last one especially is tough for the government to swallow.  
I know that today the minister of Urban Affairs for example was picked up 
here with some of his officials, was flown to Hudson Bay.  He made his 
speech and he was flown back again.  His officials were left there; they'll 
be picked up by another trip.  Here is all these planes flying back and 
forth.  Well it's no wonder they don't care about the highways going to 
seed in Saskatchewan because they never travel on the highways, Mr. 
Speaker.  They fly over the highways. 
 
But you know, there are ways to cut back.  You don't need to advertise to 
the people of Saskatchewan about the benefits of community bonds.  You 
don't need to advertise to the people of Saskatchewan about how important 
agriculture is in their lives without saying one other thing.  That's just 
what you call institutional advertising.  It's what you call political 
advertising.  It doesn't purport to talk about any specific service of 
government that might be important to the people and that they need to know 
about.  It's just sort of feathering your own nest.  It's just putting 
gloss . . . shining your own boots.  There's nothing there, Mr. Speaker, 
except waste and mismanagement. 
 
And I know members opposite are defensive about how it might impact on the 
advertising industry in Saskatchewan.  Well they might be concerned about 
their rich, well-paid, millionaire friends in the advertising business, Mr. 
Speaker.  I tell you, I'm more concerned about John Doe taxpayer, John and 
Mary Doe taxpayers of Saskatchewan who are being imposed upon by the 
provincial government to dig deeper and dig deeper and dig deeper to pay 
for their waste and mismanagement.  It's like these people have never heard 
the phrase, "waste not, want not." 
 
The list goes on, Mr. Speaker.  Some of these things that I'm going to 
raise have been raised before, Mr. Speaker, but I think that it's important 
for people to remember some of the ways in which government has wasted 
their money so that they can understand that if you end the waste, you 
eliminate the need for further taxes. 
 
They wasted $5.5 million on GigaText.  They wasted $1.2 million in Joytec 
which was supposed to be building a computerized golf simulation game.  
They wasted $681 million on Supercart.  They spent $27,000, $27,000 -- and 
it's not much, Mr. Speaker, given the overall realm of things, but all 
these things add up -- but they gave $27,000 to buy a Citroe pën, a luxury 



 

 

European automobile, for the PC government's agent-general in London, 
England, former cabinet minister, Paul Rousseau. 
 
You know, here you are in a province that's at the brink of economic 
disaster.  Here's a province that's about to impose the largest tax grab in 
Saskatchewan history because, according to the government, we're in such 
dire circumstances that we absolutely need the revenue from that source.  
Here's a province where the wheat economy has just evaporated, Mr. Speaker.  
Here is a province where thousands are leaving because of lack of 
opportunities.  Here is a province that leads all others in bankruptcies.  
Here is a province that leads all others in personal income tax.  Here's a 
province that leads the country in bad news economically, Mr. Speaker.  But 
they find they got the money to buy him a luxury automobile in London, 
England. 
 
Well I tell you, what kind of priority is that?  What kind of priority is 
that?  Seventeen thousand dollars expenses run-up by the Premier's office 
in Regina for the Hotel Saskatchewan in one year -- $17,000. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, these people, once they get elected, they say 
well you know here, I'm the Premier or I'm a cabinet minister and I'm a big 
shot and I'm going to run the government, so there's no going down to the 
cafeteria to line up with the rest of the folks with lunch.  Let's just 
order it in from the hotel.  Priorities, Mr. Speaker, priorities.  You know 
it wouldn't hurt the Premier or the cabinet ministers to brown bag it like 
most of the rest of the population and save us all some money.  Priorities, 
Mr. Speaker, priorities.  Waste.  Mismanagement. 
 
Another $19,000 expenses run-up at Regina's Ramada Renaissance Hotel;  
$64,000 paid to N.M. Rothschild & Sons Ltd. of London, England for two 
months of privatization consulting.  They would have been better off to not 
pay them anything, be better off not to have proceeded with the 
privatization; $137,000 for a cost of a luxury Regina condominium purchased 
for GigaText executive, Jean Pierre Paillet. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On my point of order, it's just 
that I'd like to draw to your attention that the member opposite has been 
reflecting on many, many topics other than the Bill 61 that's before us, 
which is entitled the PST, the provincial sales tax.  And he's wandering 
all over the place, and I wish you to, if you would, bring him back into 
order like you have in the past.  Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: -- I have been listening to the hon. member's remarks, and I 
must agree that he is somewhat wandering from the Bill itself, which is 
Bill No. 61, and therefore the point of order is well taken.  I ask the 
hon. member to stick more closely to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at the outset of 
my remarks I encouraged members to take notes, and why don't you take note 
to some of the ways that you could save money so that you don't need this 
dumb tax that nobody in Saskatchewan wants. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Why don't you cut out the waste, cut out the 
mismanagement?  Save the taxpayers some money.  Waste not, want not.  Why 
don't you follow that approach for a change instead of gouging and gouging 
and gouging and gouging the way that you do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- What's wrong with you people?  What's wrong with you?  
Don't you understand that 80 per cent of the population in this province is 
mad?  They're angry.  They're sick and tired of you.  They say you got no 
business exacting this tax at this last minute in your term.  You can't do 
it.  Call an election on this.  Let them pass judgement as to whether or 
not it's necessary.  But most of all they say, if you need something, cut 
out your wasteful spending first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd love to get some more examples of that, of where, in my 
opinion, the government has wasted money.  If they hadn't wasted that money 
we wouldn't see the need for this tax Bill before us now. 
 
I suggest to them that they need to look to alternatives to this tax Bill, 
and a good alternative would be to cut out some of their spending, the 
spending that they do with ad agencies; the $69,000 -- the cost of the 
Premier's month long junket to China, India, Hong Kong, Japan, and Korea in 
early 1989 to propose the privatization of the Potash Corporation.  And you 
have to ask yourself after spending that $69,000, after the Premier spent 
that $69,000, are you any better off today?  Are you better off today 
because the Premier went out and blew that money?  Are we better off in 
Saskatchewan?  No, we're not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point is the government should look to eliminate waste and 
mismanagement.  They should stop this foolishness.  They should stop this 
nonsense.  Perhaps then we wouldn't have the need for a tax Bill. 
 
I want to provide just one relevant example, Mr. Speaker, and this deals 
very, very strictly with the provincial sales tax.  And this is the matter 
of the Minister of Finance wasting money, wasting money on promoting the 
sales tax. 
 
It was brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker, by constituents, that they've 
received letters from the Minister of Finance after signing their names to 
petitions, after signing their names to petitions in opposition to the 
provincial sales tax -- to this provincial GST.  The Minister of Finance 
obviously put their names on a computer and paid someone to do it, 
government people, paid a government employee to enter those names onto a 
computer to write those people a letter, a two-page letter, a 40 cent stamp 
-- and of course, provincial government doesn't have to pay GST on that, 
Mr. Speaker -- but a 40 cent stamp to say, well, you know, thank you for 
your recent inquiry. 



 

 

 
Well I don't think they're inquiring; I think they were making a statement, 
Mr. Speaker.  But trying to put forward the government's case talking about 
how this sales tax increase was necessary so they could pay for GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account), 
although there's nothing in the Bill about GRIP and NISA. 
 
And we've been through that one before.  There's nothing.  Not one 
sentence.  Not one line.  Not one reference.  Nothing, nothing, nothing in 
this Bill about GRIP and NISA.  But it doesn't prevent the Minister of 
Finance from spinning his little tale about how this is necessary to pay 
for GRIP and NISA. 
 
In any event, he's writing these people a two-page letter to explain to 
them why the provincial sales tax is necessary.  That's not enough. 
 
That was done on April 15.  On May 24, he writes them again, another 
two-page letter, and encloses a document that he published at the time of 
the budget, called CHOICES, a very substantial document.  I don't think the 
content is substantive, but it certainly had a number of pages.  The 
postage on that, Mr. Speaker, was $1.80.  And, of course, you had the cost 
of entering the names on the computer; you've got the cost of printing this 
document, probably $1; you've got the cost of someone organizing this; 
you've got the cost of the letterhead; probably you'd engage some company 
to co-ordinate some of this.  Chances are you're looking probably at about 
$4 a mailing or $4 a person who signed their name to petitions. 
 
A conservative estimate is that 100,000 people in Saskatchewan signed their 
names to petitions, 100,000.  And discounting, discounting the half dozen 
or so that are Daffy Duck or Elmer Fudd or whatever, it still leaves close 
to 100,000 people who signed their names in opposition to this.  Is the 
minister saying that he's going to carry on with this foolishness and spend 
close to $400,000 to get his point of view across, to get his point of view 
across to people who didn't want it, to people who were signing petitions 
in opposition?  He's going to spend $400,000 to see if he might convince 
them to see it his way. 
 
Waste and mismanagement, Mr. Speaker -- now here's a good example, directly 
related to this Bill.  If this minister had said, well no, I don't want to 
play politics with this; these people have expressed their opinion; that's 
all that needs to be said -- but no, he wants to go out and play politics, 
to put his little spin on it, to send them all kinds of useless information 
and spend, if he carries on with this, I would estimate $400,000, Mr. 
Speaker; $400,000 that should never have been spent; $400,000 that 
shouldn't be spent; $400,000 which then doesn't need to come from revenues 
such as a provincial GST.  That's the point that I'm making, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Waste not, want not, Mr. Speaker.  It's time the minister learned that 
little lesson.  It's time that whole government took that to heart.  And if 
you don't waste money, then you don't need other money.  That's what's been 
happening in Saskatchewan -- waste, waste, waste; wasting money and then 
asking the people for more tax revenues to make up for what they've 
squandered. And we can't carry on that way.  We're not rich enough as a 



 

 

province.  We've got tremendous problems in our society. 
 
We have to start making some tough decisions.  We have to start making 
decisions about whether the government can have the largest cabinet in 
history and whether we can afford to have every back-bencher as legislative 
assistants, give them additional pay.  We have to ask ourselves if that's a 
legitimate expenditure of money.  We have to ask ourselves whether we can 
afford luxury automobiles for some of our employees.  We have to ask 
ourselves whether we can afford luxury condominiums for people who are here 
on some rip-off project.  We have to ask ourselves those things, whether we 
can afford to spend $400,000 on writing letters to people who are opposed 
to something. 
 
I venture to say that the Minister of Finance never once, never once asked 
his staff, how much would it cost me if I were to send out these letters 
the way that you're suggesting?  How much would it cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan?  Have you done some estimate of the costs here?  How much 
would it cost us?  And if we didn't do it, could we save some money? 
 
But no, the minister would never think of it that way and which is one of 
the reasons, one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that this province is in big, 
big trouble, because this government doesn't understand priorities. This 
government doesn't understand the need to tailor expectations and to tailor 
spending along the lines of the needs and the wants of the Saskatchewan 
public.  It's a shame, Mr. Speaker, that the government has seen fit to 
move this way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as I'm concerned, the answer is to locate other 
revenues, but first of all and primarily, is to eliminate some of the waste 
and mismanagement in government spending.  We estimate that the government 
could save $100 million a year -- $100 million a year quickly, Mr. Speaker.  
And I would venture to say there's lots of other ways that it could save 
money.  Even now with a province that's teetering on the edge of 
bankruptcies, where liabilities far exceed assets, this province continues 
on some course to spend money as if it knows no boundaries at all. 
 
Again today we've had announcements of civil servants being moved out of 
Regina to far-off locations in the province, and the government deciding to 
spend probably $50 million in pursuit of a political objective.  And the 
people of Saskatchewan are asking, can we afford that? Can we afford the 
tax?  I have no doubt what they're saying.  They're saying, cut out the 
wasteful expenditures, cut out the tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move to another aspect of my comments and this has 
to do with the fact that this tax is coming at the wrong time.  I said in 
my introduction that not only was the tax wrong and gave reasons to support 
that, but I said that even if you were inclined to believe, inclined to 
believe that this is the right kind of taxing mechanism to raise revenues, 
even if you didn't believe or buy the arguments about this being a 
regressive tax and we needed to have more progressive taxes, even if you 
didn't believe any of those things and felt that for whatever philosophical 
reasons that a consumption tax was the way to go -- I mean I don't think 
there's one person in Saskatchewan that buys the argument that this is the 



 

 

right time for the tax.  Mr. Speaker, this is entirely the wrong time for 
the tax.  Not only is this the wrong tax, but it's the wrong tax at the 
wrong time. 
 
And what I'm talking about is the effect that this tax will have on the 
economy of Saskatchewan today and next year.  I think most people in 
Saskatchewan understand that Saskatchewan's economy is in a very tenuous, 
delicate state, that Saskatchewan has been in the midst of a recession now 
for some time, that no growth is the order of the day, and that governments 
need to be very careful about doing anything that might further damage or 
impair the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy is in a mess, it's in a bad 
situation, and I think even the government recognizes that.  Earlier this 
year, Mr. Speaker, we were provided with a copy of a book called the 
Saskatchewan Economic Forecast 1990-1994, which was published in February 
of 1991 and was prepared by the economic and fiscal policy branch of 
Saskatchewan Finance.  This a confidential document that found its way out 
of the cabinet offices of government into the hands of the people.  And the 
objective of this document is to provide a consistent overview of the 
economy for internal planning purposes within government departments and 
Crown corporations.  They conclude in their provincial overview, Mr. 
Speaker, and their forecast highlights are: 1991, recession, grain prices 
fall, weak agricultural incomes and GST pressure the economy, unemployment 
higher, migration slows -- and I'll get to that in a minute; 1992, 
recession continues, grain prices continue to fall, investment slows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this document concluded or stated was a number of things. 
First of all the output -- they say overall the economy is expected to 
decline, 0.5 per cent growth.  They say with respect to consumer spending . 
. . And this is a very key and important aspect of my comments because the 
tax before us directly impacts consumer spending and is the basis for many 
of the comments that I will make about why this is the wrong time to be 
imposing any such tax. 
 

 Consumer spending is expected to remain weak in real terms as sagging farm 
incomes and provincial budgetary pressures keep consumers at home.  Real 
consumer spending is expected to decline this year and next . . .  

 
What they're saying about consumer spending is that it's going to remain 
weak, that it's going to decline.  And it raises the question and it begs 
the question that if consumers are already of a frame of mind to not spend 
money, if consumers for whatever reasons are not inclined to go out and 
spend money, why would you impose upon them a further charge which is going 
to further discourage them from spending money. 
 
Because the economy, Mr. Speaker, is based to a very great extent, if not 
all, on money being in circulation, of money being circulated round and 
round.  And if you somehow discourage the circulation of money it impacts 
strongly, severely on the economy.  Well that's what's happening here. 
Notwithstanding the advice they got from their own officials about consumer 
spending, this government sees fit now to put this additional charge on 
consumers in Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
 Trade.  While exports are expected to be up 10.6 % in 1991 in volume terms 

the weakening of commodity prices will cause the nominal value of exports 
to actually decline this year. 

 
 The labour market. The unemployment rate is expected to rise to 7.4 % in 

1991 . . . reflecting (the) slowing employment growth relative to labour 
force growth. 

 
 Migration and Population. As has been expected, the population declined 

below 1 million people in 1990.  Migration is expected to temporarily 
stabilize this year as economic prospects across the country weaken.  
Improving conditions across the country relative to Saskatchewan will 
cause out-migration to re-accelerate in 1992 and 1993 . . .  

 
(1945) 
 
So migration is expected to temporarily stabilize, or migration won't be as 
much of a factor in 1991, Mr. Speaker, because the economic situation in 
all other provinces is so bad.  So people won't be exiting quite as 
rapidly.  Nothing here about improving conditions in Saskatchewan in 1991, 
but just that the rest of the country will be in such bad shape that no one 
will want to move. 
 
Those are some of the comments from the government's own officials in 
describing the economic situation in Saskatchewan this year and projected 
for the next number of years.  Other groups have had more to say, Mr. 
Speaker.  The Conference Board came down with a report not too long ago.  
In their provincial outlook for 1991: Saskatchewan, a weak farm sector and 
substantial depopulation -- 1.4 per cent decline; not .05, but 1.4. 
 

 The impact of depressed farm income on consumer spending is also a 
contributing factor to the poor economic growth predictions, the board 
stated. 

 
So the Conference Board, which is a fairly authoritative organization, 
states that Saskatchewan is experiencing hard times.  In fact, the headline 
is, "Outlook for Sask. is bleak". 
 
The only people that seem to have anything positive to say about the 
provincial economy are the Minister of Finance -- but not his officials -- 
and of course, the investment dealers of the Investment Dealers 
Association, Mr. Speaker, who predict rosy things for Saskatchewan and say 
that Saskatchewan is just booming and is going to be doing well.  But 
investment dealers, by the nature of their occupation, tend to look on the 
rosy side of things and tend to look through things . . . look at life 
through rose-coloured glasses, Mr. Speaker, because if they didn't believe 
that things were going to get better, well no one would be investing in the 
economy, which is how they make their living. So I'm not surprised by their 
prediction of what's going to happen in Saskatchewan.  But then I never 
have been.  I mean, no matter what the circumstances, the investment 
dealers always find something positive to say about the immediate prospects 
so as to encourage people to continue to invest. 



 

 

 
So it's clear, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial economic situation is poor, 
that the immediate outlook is poor, and that there are no immediate signals 
on the horizon which would tell us that there is going to be some turn 
around.  So it's generally accepted by all concerned, except for the 
government members and of their officials, generally accepted that 
Saskatchewan is in tough circumstances. 
 
Knowing that as we do, and maybe having some suspicions about how a tax on 
consumer items might impact consumer spending and further drive the economy 
into a tail-spin, knowing that as we do, it boggles the mind, Mr. Speaker, 
that the government would be hell-bent to press on, to continue on with 
their plan to impose this tax measure on the Saskatchewan public.  It 
defies logic, it defies description, and probably one of the reasons that 
business groups in Saskatchewan are very concerned, very worried about what 
it is that the government is doing. 
 
If we didn't need . . . or if a knowledge of the economic situation isn't 
enough to convince the government about the negative impact that this GST 
will have in Saskatchewan, one might look to relevant other measures which 
have been taken by which to judge the impact of this provincial GST, so as 
to have some forewarning, some idea of what it is that we can expect by 
pressing ahead with this GST.  And of course we don't need to look very 
far, Mr. Speaker, because Canada, and the people of Saskatchewan included, 
has just witnessed and experienced the imposition of the goods and services 
tax throughout the country.  So that we are in a position to examine the 
impact of that tax after some six months of operation, to have some 
appreciation of what it is that a consumer tax like that will do to the 
economy. 
 
And I tell you, there's been lots written about that, Mr. Speaker, lots 
written.  If only the government would stop to read and stop to acknowledge 
that the imposition of a goods and services tax at this point in time is 
the worst thing that they can do to the economy. 
 
In this Saskatchewan economic forecast that I talked about earlier, there's 
also a section on Canada, and it states that in talking about consumer 
expenditures -- which again is the important factor here; this is the base 
for my remarks, and the basis of concern as expressed by business groups in 
Saskatchewan -- consumer spending, money that consumers are putting out to 
buy products within the jurisdiction, and if consumers stop doing that, 
then the provincial economy is in severe problems. 
 
But here's what they say about consumer spending and the impact of the GST.  
This is the government's own economist, Mr. Speaker.  They state: 
 

 Substantial declines in employment, high interest rates and low levels of 
consumer confidence not seen since the 1981-82 recession will all force a 
stagnation in household spending in the fourth quarter.  Finally, the 
erosion in purchasing power caused by the introduction of the GST in 1991, 
coupled with the full impact of the declines in employment, is forecast to 
lead to a significant decline in household spending early in 1991. 

 



 

 

Now here's the government's own people acknowledging the erosion of 
purchasing power which follows the introduction of a goods and services 
tax, on top of comments that they've already expressed about consumer 
spending and the economy of Saskatchewan.  You'd think that it might cause 
the Minister of Finance to just pause and stop and say, well, you know, 
given the shaky state of our economy does it make any sense?  Also, given 
what we know about the imposition of the goods and services tax across the 
country, does it make any sense now to carry on?  Does it make any sense 
now to carry on and to do this to the Saskatchewan economy at this point in 
time?  My thinking is that if he'd have stopped to think about that and 
asked some questions about that, we might not see this Bill today.  But he 
didn't. 
 
Here's an article, Mr. Speaker, from The Globe and Mail, March 29, and the 
headline is "GST delivers uppercut to economy."  And this is from Ottawa, 
and these are statistics released by Statistics Canada, but the 
introductory paragraph is: 
 

 The introduction of the goods and services tax knocked the stuffing out of 
the economy in January, doing the economic equivalent of kicking someone 
who is already on the ground. 

 
Now here the economy in Saskatchewan is already on the ground, Mr. Speaker.  
It's already being battered by the imposition of this goods and services 
tax.  On top of that, the Minister of Finance and his colleagues refuse to 
acknowledge the harmful effect of this tax at this point in time.  What 
they want to do is kick the economy further.  They want to give it another 
shot.  Well how much can the Saskatchewan economy withstand? 
 
There is no doubt about what impact the GST has had on the Canadian economy 
-- none whatsoever.  There is no doubt about the fragile state in 
Saskatchewan economy.  Why they would want to damage and impair the 
Saskatchewan economy any further is beyond me, Mr. Speaker.  But then 
there's a lot of things that they do that frankly I don't understand, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here's another article, and the headline is from May 7 in the Leader-Post 
-- "GST 'hurting' hotel business". 
 

 The GST cost Canada's hotels up to $67 million in lost convention business 
in the first three months of 1991. 

 
And this is according to the Convention and Incentive Travel Association of 
Canada after it conducted a survey. 
 
Here's a government on the one hand which is spending millions, millions to 
try to get people from outside of Saskatchewan to visit here for tourism 
reasons, spending millions to convince Saskatchewan people to stay at home 
and to spend their tourism dollars here, but at the same time takes a 
substantial action which will discourage tourists from coming here and 
which will discourage Saskatchewan people from spending their money at 
home.  It makes no sense at all. 
 



 

 

You'd think you didn't read anything.  You'd think you didn't listen to 
anybody.  But the implications are clear.  Because it's happened 
nationally, we understand how a goods and services tax can impact the 
economy.  Mr. Speaker, when will these people listen? 
 
Inflation.  Inflation is another thing, Mr. Speaker, that will jump with 
the goods and services tax.  We had some figures recently, Mr. Speaker, and 
those figures show that in a one-month period between March and April the 
inflation rate in Saskatoon jumped by 1.3 per cent and in Regina by 1.4 per 
cent.  The average for all of Canada was a zero increase during that 
one-month period.  And here you see a big jump in the inflation rate in 
Saskatchewan cities because of the goods and services tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it's clear to most people in Saskatchewan that this tax 
does not deserve the time of day; that this tax will do serious harm to the 
economy.  But you can't get the government to listen to what it is that the 
people are saying; you can't get them to read what the experts are writing, 
and you can't get them to acknowledge what's going on in this country, Mr. 
Speaker.  And it's a shame, because if they did they wouldn't be bringing 
this tax before us. 
 
Another implication, Mr. Speaker, of this tax -- for this year in any event 
. . . and I see today that there is some announcement by the federal 
government, by Otto Jelinek, that they're going to start charging this tax 
at the border.  I don't know about the Alberta border, but they're going to 
start charging it at the border.  And that by charging the tax on the 
border it's going to reduce the number of cross-border shopping visits that 
Saskatchewan people are making to the United States to purchase goods that 
they are no longer prepared to buy in Saskatchewan.  Because in 
Saskatchewan now they're faced with a 14 per cent tax; 7 per cent federal 
GST, 7 per cent provincial GST. 
 
By January 1 next year that's supposed to be all ended because they're 
going to start collecting tax at the border.  Well don't bet the farm on 
that, Mr. Speaker.  Don't bet the farm that the government is going to be 
as successful as they hope to be in this matter -- don't bet the farm on 
that.  And I'd like to know how they're going to collect the GST at the 
Alberta border.  Are we going to set up a border there, Mr. Speaker?  Are 
we going to hire people to police people coming back and forth and we're 
going to check them for items?  Is that what we're going to do?  Don't bet 
the farm on this measure having great effect. 
 
But I tell you the one thing we do know is that because of the attitude 
that's created by the Free Trade Agreement where people had some sense 
that, well now that we have a Free Trade Agreement we can just go across 
the border and buy whatever we want and it'll be cheaper than it is in 
Canada.  And because of the introduction of the federal goods and services 
tax across the country, Canadian consumers as never before in our history 
are crossing the border to make their purchases in the United States as a 
way of avoiding what they perceive to be high prices and high taxes in 
Canada. 
 
Now given that state of affairs, given the fact that we know that and 



 

 

everybody knows that, anybody that's watched the TV news or read a 
newspaper knows that . . . I mean you can't escape the TV news with TV 
shots of cars lined up for kilometres on end getting across the border and 
the government said they're going to speed that up, they're going to have 
express lines so people can go faster.  But you can't escape that; people 
know that.  It's the talk of the town.  Everyone's getting out of town, 
going down to the States because they perceive that they can get some 
advantage by shopping there. 
 
Now you have to ask yourself, on top of that already taking place 
throughout Canada, why we would want to exacerbate that here in 
Saskatchewan.  Why would we want to aggravate the problem even further in 
Saskatchewan?  And it may well be a laughing matter to members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, but I tell you it's no laughing matter to a number of 
businesses and leaders in our border communities because they're painfully 
aware of what is happening. 
 
(2000) 
 
Their sales volumes are down.  Their employment needs are down.  Their 
ability to pay income taxes is down as their profits decline and as their 
employment declines.  That's the reality for people in border communities 
and the government is hanging its hat on one thing and one thing only, and 
that is the hopes of collecting some of that tax back next year.  It won't 
help people along the Alberta border and I'm not sure what kind of help 
generally that's going to provide, Mr. Speaker, but I wouldn't bet a whole 
lot, a whole lot on the government being able to successfully deter 
shoppers from going across the border, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just as an example, I have here an article from the Leader-Post, on March 
28 and the headline is, "More Minot trips likely" and the lead paragraph 
is: 
 

 For one Regina family, the impending seven-per-cent provincial sales tax 
means more visits to used clothing stores and more shopping trips to the 
United States. 

 
And the rest is detail.  More shopping trips to the United States.  That's 
the effect that the imposition of this 7 per cent provincial GST has had so 
far.  We knew that was going to be the case. That has been the case; it 
will continue to be the case, and it will get worse in the future. 
 
Why the government would choose this time then to impose the 7 per cent 
provincial GST is beyond my reasoning and beyond the logical understanding 
of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker.  Certainly it is beyond the logic of 
business people in Saskatchewan because their theory is that no sales, no 
tax.  If you don't have any sales, you don't pay any tax.  If sales are 
down because of the tax, you reduce tax revenue. If only the government 
would understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just quickly want to sum up my comments with respect to the 
economic situation by just relating to you some quotes here about how some 
businesses have been affected.  And here's one concerning restaurants -- 



 

 

and there's been a lot of talk about restaurants.  Here's a quote from a 
customer in a lounge in Moose Jaw, and this is April 2, 1991: 
 

 Customers in his lounge supported the tax boycott, voicing displeasure 
with the provincial version of the GST. 

 
 "It's insane," said . . . (one man), turning both his thumbs down to 

emphasis the point. 
 
 "Before the GST, I went out to eat twice a week.  Now, it's once a week 

and with this new tax, it'll be once a month.  I just can't afford it 
anymore." 

 
Mr. Speaker, that paraphrases and encapsulates the concerns that 
Saskatchewan restaurateurs have about this tax.  "It's a matter of 
survival," as one said. "We can't afford to lose any more customers."  Mr. 
Speaker, and the government members heckle when I talk about this.  They 
don't seem to appreciate that. 
 
But of course with their inflation-proofed cabinet salaries and their 
inflation-proofed government expense accounts, Mr. Speaker, this is the 
last of concerns for these people, because the Premier and his cabinet 
ministers are quite happy to run up expensive bills at Regina restaurants 
and Regina hotels, in support of their entertainment needs, all paid for by 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  So if the GST or the provincial GST adds to 
that cost, it doesn't really matter to them because the taxpayers are 
paying for it anyway.  So they don't really understand the concern that 
Saskatchewan people are having about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just recently we had a number of used-car dealers here at the 
legislature.  And the article here in the Star-Phoenix, the lead paragraph 
is: at least half of Saskatchewan's used car dealers will shut their doors 
permanently next year if the government goes ahead with tax harmonization, 
a Regina dealer predicted Wednesday. 
 
And without going into details, Mr. Speaker, I would simply point out that 
the GST on used cars doesn't come into effect until January 1, next year.  
But the perception of Saskatchewan people is that the tax is already in 
place.  And because of that perception, used-car sales are plummeting in 
Saskatchewan.  And so it's little wonder that car dealers, used-car 
dealers, are concerned about what's going to happen to them. 
 
Here's another group, the Saskatchewan Business Coalition to STOP the PST.  
And the reason I'm raising these things is that in case the government 
members don't believe anything I have to say, I hope they might sort of 
understand and appreciate what it is that some business people in 
Saskatchewan have to say,  and not the industrialists and the Cargills and 
so on who stand to be the major beneficiaries of this PST, but those in the 
service sector and those who every day have to go out and sell products, 
products which are now going to be taxed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But here's a group from Saskatoon, and they call themselves the 
Saskatchewan Business Coalition to STOP the PST.  And this group held a 



 

 

news conference on May 21 and they called on the provincial government to 
withdraw the legislation which would implement the expanded 7 per cent 
provincial sales tax. 
 
The chairman of this coalition, Les Dube pé, said the following, Mr. 
Speaker: this huge new tax is very detrimental to the Saskatchewan economy, 
especially at this time, because it takes hundreds of millions of dollars 
of disposal income out of the pockets of consumers.  Less disposable income 
for low and middle income families means they will have less to spend at 
local businesses.  Lower sales at local businesses will mean lower profits 
and lost jobs.  The consequences of this huge new tax are widespread and 
severe.  End of quote. 
 
And they're urging the provincial government to reconsider the damage the 
tax will do to the economy.  And they had a survey, and they say that sales 
in the general retail service sector are down sharply.  And a survey 
conducted of coalition restaurant members represented today shows sales are 
down in excess of 20 per cent.  And as a result people have lost their jobs 
or have had their hours of work cut back due to these lower sales. 
 
And I speak from experience, Mr. Speaker, that friends that I have in 
business, in the restaurant business especially, are taking the position 
that, well, they're going to have to work longer hours, and they're going 
to have to get by with a little bit less staff than they have in the past.  
They're going to have to put more into the business themselves, and they're 
prepared to do that.  But the tragedy of it is that again this summer there 
is going to be one or two fewer students hired in their restaurant, and 
during the course of the year be one less person hired in that restaurant 
-- a person that probably needs a job, given the state of the provincial 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that's the tragedy of this tax.  The tragedy that at a time that the 
Saskatchewan economy is weak -- that it's in trouble -- that the government 
would see fit to do more harm, to inflict more damage, and to impair it 
even further, Mr. Speaker.  And that's the real tragedy.  And we've had 
their officials, the economists, say that it's the bad time to do it, and 
we've had business groups say that it's the wrong time to do it but yet the 
government presses ahead.  And press ahead they do. 
 
You know, when the heat got too much they released their own study which 
suggested that the imposition of the GST . . . notwithstanding everything 
that the economists have had to say, notwithstanding the experience in 
Canada with the goods and services tax, notwithstanding the comments of 
business groups in Saskatchewan -- and this last group is headed by Les 
Dube pé who's no socialist, I understand.  He's no member of the New 
Democratic Party.  I understand that he's a supporter of the Conservative 
Party.  I also understand that he's an astute business person; that he 
knows what he's doing. 
 
Well, notwithstanding all those comments, the government felt the heat and 
released the paper some three months after first announcing the GST, and 
after weeks of hammering in the legislature about where's your study to 
back-up your contention that this is going to be a good thing?  Where's 



 

 

your paper?  And the government released a paper on the impact of the 
provincial GST. 
 
Finally they did it -- finally they did it.  But it's an awkward and 
belated public relations exercise, Mr. Speaker, produced only because the 
government was embarrassed, embarrassed by not having any economic studies 
or analyses to support its position.  It was released three months after 
their announcement in late February of the tax, and they were questioned 
severely, both the minister and the Premier in the legislature -- you'll 
remember that -- about any study, and finally they cobbled one together, 
Mr. Speaker, but it's very poor. 
 
There is no acknowledgement, for example, in their study that the federal 
GST was claimed to be revenue-neutral, and I spoke about that before.  But 
this provincial GST is a tax increase, yet they use some of the modelling 
studies of the GST federally to say this is going to be the impact here, 
notwithstanding the fact that the federal GST was intended to do some 
different things. 
 
Most of the argument for the positive economic effects is based on the view 
that the business input tax credit will reduce the tax load on businesses 
and thereby lead to more investment and more jobs in Saskatchewan.  But 
there's no guarantee, Mr. Speaker, as we've seen with the goods and 
services tax, there's no guarantee that once businesses receive a tax 
break, or are no longer expected to pay a certain tax, that it's going to 
result in the lowering of prices. 
 
In fact there is some evidence now produced by the Consumers' Association 
of Canada, and evidence also that we see coming out of the consumer 
information office for the goods and services tax, that businesses are not 
passing along savings by not paying the federal tax; that they're not 
passing along these savings as was hoped by the government prior to the 
imposition of the goods and services tax and as the federal government said 
would happen.  It just hasn't been the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there's nothing to suggest that this input tax credit, this $260 million 
or so that's going to go to major industrial enterprises here in 
Saskatchewan is going to do the thing that the government says it's going 
to do, and that is create over 5,000 new jobs.  I don't think there's any 
person in Saskatchewan who believes that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a government that believes that because of the provincial sales tax 
that there's going to be an increase in jobs in the restaurant sector in 
Saskatchewan.  I don't know what they're putting in their pipe and smoking 
these days, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you, from the comments that I've 
read, from the experience, from talking to people in the restaurant 
business, that they're cutting back, that they're not expanding, that they 
can't afford to expand because people are buying less.  And if people are 
buying less, then they have to cut back. So I don't know where they get 
this idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They do cite Cargill Grain Company, the fertilizer plant, as one of those 
projects that's going to get a windfall gain of millions of dollars, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, and I guess we should all be thankful in Saskatchewan that even if 
Saskatchewan consumers are being gouged, Cargill Grain Company is going to 
see a windfall of some millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker.  We should all be 
thankful of that because we know the good things that Cargill will do for 
Saskatchewan people. But that remains to be seen too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tax is a disaster tax.  I predict that the Saskatchewan 
economy is going to do worse than forecasted by the provincial government; 
that this tax is going to drive people on a mad shopping frenzy across the 
border to North Dakota and Montana and to Alberta.  It's going to cause 
people to leave the province as never before to do their shopping, and it's 
going to cause a decline in consumer spending within Saskatchewan the likes 
we haven't experienced for some time.  At the same time, there'll be a jump 
in inflation in Saskatchewan and we'll see more lost jobs.  We will see 
more reduction in the kinds of opportunities that are normally available 
for Saskatchewan people and we will see more and more, and thousands more, 
leaving the province, Mr. Speaker, in pursuit of opportunities elsewhere. 
 
(2015) 
 
Oh, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that the government has done its job when it 
comes to this goods and services tax.  I don't think that they fully 
appreciate the harmful effects that this provincial GST will have on the 
provincial economy, how fragile that economy is, how delicate it is, and 
how easy it is to damage and impair it further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the outset of my remarks I said that this is the wrong tax, 
and I give reasons to support that.  I've just now talked about this being 
the wrong time for the tax and even if you support the concept of this tax, 
you have to realize, as Mr. Dube pé and his business coalition group does, 
that this is the wrong time for the tax.  And I think he uses the words, 
"at this time".  He's not saying that he's necessarily opposed to the tax 
per se, just saying it's the wrong time given the state of the economy 
here. 
 
I want to carry this one step further in saying this is the wrong 
government, the wrong government to be making major decisions about taxing 
implications for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This government is near the end of its mandate.   Now in Canada, 
governments are elected and they're elected for a legal term of five years.  
That's the law of the land, Mr. Speaker.  That's what's contained, I 
understand, within our constitution -- that when a government is elected, 
whether it's federal or provincial, their mandate expires after five years, 
legally. 
 
But traditionally, historically in Saskatchewan, governments don't go the 
full five years.  In fact they seek to renew their mandate usually after 
four years.  And for the most part, Saskatchewan governments have gone back 
to their constituents after four years and put forward their program and 
their proposals for the future and have sought to renew their mandate and 
have asked the Saskatchewan people for a vote of confidence to continue on 
with what they're doing or to move forward in pursuit of new objectives as 



 

 

defined by the government, Mr. Speaker.  That's been the history and 
tradition of Saskatchewan. 
 
There have been some exceptions to this, this government being an exception 
in 1986, that as opposed to going four years it decided to go four and a 
half years.  I believe in 1978 the Blakeney government went three and a 
half years, as opposed to four years, because they feared conflicting with 
the federal election at the four-year mark.  So there are some exceptions 
to this, but the rule in the main is that you go to the electorate after 
four years to renew your mandate. 
 
It's contrary to practice and tradition and history, not only here in 
Saskatchewan but throughout the country.  It's contrary to history and 
tradition that governments would in their dying months of their mandate 
seek to implement major new initiatives that have major implications for 
the people of that province.  Governments in their dying days don't put 
forward extensive new taxes for the population because they take the point 
of view that anything that has major implications like that for the future, 
the public should have a right to say something about that, should get 
involved in that in terms of the election.  Governments don't undertake 
major new initiatives in their last five or six months of a five-year term 
without consulting the public. 
 
To undertake major new initiatives, to get on with a new program, and to do 
new things you need a fresh mandate.  You need support from the public who 
say, yes, we all agree with the government or the opposition as to what it 
is that . . . or the situation that Saskatchewan people find themselves in 
and where we go from here. 
 
But you don't have the situation, or at least I can't recall ever in 
Saskatchewan, of a government in its dying days seeking to impose this huge 
tax hike on its people.  We don't see the government, or a government in 
its dying days proposing to commit 50 to $100 million to move civil 
servants around, which has major implications for Saskatchewan, major 
implications.  We have never seen governments do that. 
 
And I would say that this government needs to renew the support of the 
people of Saskatchewan before it moves forward with this tax.  And we say 
they have no mandate; we don't mean legally, we mean traditionally, 
historically, and morally, that they don't have the right to move forward.  
Taxing the public is one of the major things that a government can do, and 
to do it in such a major way as they're proposing to do with this tax needs 
to have the involvement of the public. 
 
To move forward and to hope to have the support of the people in any such 
unpopular thing means you need to have an election, so at least all of the 
public for a brief period of time can get behind the government and say, 
okay, we agree with what you do; give her your best shot.  But not in its 
dying days, Mr. Speaker.  It is unthinkable; it has never been done before; 
it's not what Saskatchewan people have come to expect. 
 
But then I guess we shouldn't expect too much from a government, Mr. 
Speaker, that has want to always put its political spin on things, that has 



 

 

always want to call black white and to call white black, and that 
notwithstanding the real facts of the situation, tries to give it some 
unique interpretation in the hopes that the people of Saskatchewan might 
agree with them.  Such is their political spin that this Bill 61 that we're 
talking about, this Bill 61 which is going to extend the sales tax to be 
harmonized with the federal goods and services tax, that all the revenue 
from this is going to go for GRIP and NISA. 
 
Over and over and over again they say to the Saskatchewan public, but we 
need this, we need this Bill.  We need this Bill so we can pay for GRIP and 
NISA.  But there's nothing in this Bill that talks about GRIP and NISA, and 
if you didn't have the Bill you could still pay for GRIP and NISA.  It's 
just so much political spin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people know that, and one of the reasons that they're fed up 
with these people, they're fed up with a government that tries to deny the 
facts.  They're fed up with a government that's always trying to pull the 
wool over their eyes.  They're fed up with a government that's always, 
always trying to pull some semantic fast one on them, Mr. Speaker.  They're 
fed up with that.  They won't stand it; they won't put up with it any more. 
 
Just a few weeks ago, a week or so ago, Mr. Speaker, when we had the 
impasse here in the Legislative Assembly -- the impasse here in the 
Legislative Assembly when the government threatened the use of closure so 
that we could no longer debate this Bill, and the opposition's reading 
petitions -- we had the Minister of Agriculture issue a news release to the 
effect that if we didn't get back and pass the GRIP and NISA Bills, which 
were before the Legislative Assembly, that somehow GRIP and NISA wasn't 
going to proceed.  And because the opposition, debating the way that they 
had that Bill, that somehow GRIP and NISA wasn't going to be a reality, and 
the farm safety net programs wouldn't come into place for the Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Well that's just hog-wash, Mr. Speaker, just plain, pure hog-wash.  But 
it's another case of the government trying to put its own little political 
spin on a situation -- a spin that bears no semblance of reality, Mr. 
Speaker -- but again trying to pull a semantic fast one, trying to put some 
political tall tale over the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I tell you, the people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of that.  They 
won't put up with it any more.  It's one of the reasons you people are 
going down into the polls and you're going to sink down in the polls 
because you keep trying to pull some fast one on the people of 
Saskatchewan.  They won't put up with it any more.  They've had it up to 
here with your foolishness that way. 
 
You know, and it just goes on and on and on.  Even in 1986, prior to the 
election, well we're going to have a deficit of $385 million.  And in the 
election, well the deficit has risen to $500 million.  After the election, 
well the deficit now is $1.2 billion.  Did you know, Mr. Minister, before 
the election, that it might get this way?  No, of course not.  Well, nobody 
believed that.  Nobody believed that.  Why didn't you just level with the 
people of Saskatchewan? 



 

 

 
No, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of a 
government that tries to put this political fast talk on everything that 
they do and that the people disagree with.  They're sick and tired of that.  
No one believes this government any more.  They have no credibility.  And I 
say, when they're not believed, and they have no credibility, and 80 per 
cent of the people opposed them in this, and it's in their final months of 
their term, I say, legalities notwithstanding, they have no mandate to do 
what they're doing with this tax Bill, Mr. Speaker, no mandate at all. 
 
You know, you only have to look at Saskatchewan history and some of the 
things that the members on the government side have said to get sort of an 
idea about the things that they've said and where we are today, to 
understand the wide divergence about the rhetoric . . . the diversion 
between the rhetoric and the actual situation. 
 
Here is the Premier of Saskatchewan in 1982 saying that deficits are just a 
deferred tax that must be paid by future generations; doesn't say that 
these days.  Then in 1983 he said, Saskatchewan has so much going for it 
that you can afford to mismanage it and still break even.  Well he 
mismanaged it all right, but we didn't break even to the great regret of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Here are some quotes from PC Finance ministers, Mr. Speaker, on the 
deficit.  1982, the first PC deficit ever: this is a minimized manageable 
deficit; Bob Andrew.  Oh?  We're now getting close to the 5 billion mark.  
1983, Bob Andrew: we anticipate a manageable increase in our combined 
deficit.  Didn't turn out that way. 
 
Bob Andrew, budget speech 1984: we believe that all governments must work 
in concert to reduce budget deficits; failure to accomplish this will force 
harsh financial penalties on our children.  It is inevitable that mounting 
deficits will result in unwanted reductions in government services and tax 
increases.  This guy had a crystal ball, very prophetic.  The chickens are 
coming home to roost now, very much coming home to roost. 
 
It's too bad that the government didn't have the courage of their 
convictions; didn't have the courage to balance the budget in those days 
even when they had good opportunity to do so. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Oh, here's a good one.  This government is 
confident that a balanced budget can be achieved within the next five years 
-- and this is the member for Qu'Appelle who was the Finance minister in 
1986.  No balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, just so much hot air. 
 
And this Minister of Finance here, last year saying loudly and clearly, 
taxpayers throughout Saskatchewan are saying that tax increases are not 
acceptable.  And he goes on to say, the goods and services tax is 
unacceptable, quite simply the people have said they have no more to give; 
enough is enough.  How it is that the Minister of Finance less than a year 
later can turn around and muster arguments in support of a provincial goods 
and services tax is beyond me.  How can this person have any  
 Dcredibility with the people of Saskatchewan when one year he can say 



 

 

these things about a goods and services tax being unacceptable -- the 
people have said they have no more to give, enough is enough -- and one 
year later, or less than one year later, expecting them to come up and 
support the biggest tax hike in history? 
 
This is another reason, Mr. Speaker, that this government has no mandate 
because the public just doesn't believe anything they have to say any more.  
It doesn't believe them on this goods and services tax; it doesn't believe 
them when they say that they're going to create 5,000 new jobs through the 
imposition of the goods and services tax; doesn't believe anything that 
they have to say in this regard, Mr. Speaker, and the reason that I would 
say and most people would say that they have no mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't have much more to say, but I will say this:  my leader 
has made it clear, my party has made it clear that, notwithstanding 
anything that happens in this Legislative Assembly, that should the New 
Democratic Party form the next provincial government in Saskatchewan, we 
will repeal this Bill.  We will repeal this harsh tax measure because we 
believe it's the wrong tax.  We believe it's the wrong tax at the wrong 
time.  And we believe it's the wrong tax at the wrong time by the wrong 
government, Mr. Speaker.  It's time to put an end to this foolishness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- But, Mr. Speaker, I would not be so bold as to go out 
on a limb and say that the New Democratic Party will unequivocally form the 
next government.  There is a chance that the members opposite might be 
re-elected.  And on that off chance I am committed to defeating this 
legislation in the House.  I am committed to seeing that this legislation 
goes no further.  I want this Bill stopped. 
 
And of course we don't have enough votes on our side of the House, but I am 
hoping, Mr. Speaker -- hoping, hoping, hoping -- that the government 
members, the back-benchers on their side might impose on their colleagues 
on the cabinet, have a few quiet words with them and enlighten them on the 
harmful effects of this particular tax and what a disaster it is for the 
Saskatchewan economy should the government go ahead with this Bill. 
 
Even if the front-benchers don't have the wisdom, I suspect that some of 
the back-benchers do, and that perhaps, just perhaps, they might in a quiet 
way put a word in here and there and have this Bill withdrawn.  And in the 
very least, Mr. Speaker, hope that the government will support the 
amendment that I'm going to make now that I've completed my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- And, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

 That all the words after the word "That" be deleted and the following 



 

 

substituted therefor: 
 
 D Bill 61, An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act (No. 2), be not 

now read a second time, but that it be read a second time this day six 
months hence. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 
opportunity to participate in this debate on Bill 61.  My faith in the 
democratic process was restored somewhat last week when the government 
decided to allow duly elected members of this legislature to speak on this 
Bill.  The decision, Mr. Speaker, was a great win for the people of 
Saskatchewan who by the tens of thousands have signed the petition asking 
the government to stop the PST legislation and to have a provincial 
election. 
 
Well we haven't stopped the tax yet, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to try and 
fight this tax.  We're hoping to stop this tax some time during this 
session.  But I can assure you of this much, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan will put an end to this tax grab when we have an election and 
when the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan forms the next government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, there will be no harmonized PST under an NDP 
government, I can assure the people of Saskatchewan that much. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the election campaign nine years ago a new government 
was elected on a tax-cutting platform.  The new Premier and his colleagues 
promised to eliminate the tax on gasoline, they promised to eliminate the 
sales tax, they promised to cut personal income taxes by 10 per cent -- I'm 
sure you remember this, Mr. Speaker -- and they promised to reduce the 
royalties paid by big oil companies. 
 
Well I want to review the Tory record on taxation given their promises in 
1982.  The fuel tax was abolished in 1982.  It was reinstated in 1987 with 
a rebate for gasoline used in personal automobiles, and in 1990 the rebate 
was abolished.  The fuel tax is now 10 cents per litre and it was 6.6 cents 
in 1982.  That's their record on the fuel tax. 
 
The sales tax, Mr. Speaker, was initially removed on some items such as 
clothing -- the rate was increased from 5 per cent to 7 per cent.  And on 
April 1, 1991, the government that promised to eliminate the sales tax 
extended the sales tax to cover a much wider range of goods including 
books, restaurant meals, and clothing.  And the government, Mr. Speaker, 
intends to start charging the tax on services beginning in January of 1992. 
 
Now let's look at personal income taxes -- personal income taxes -- the 
party that promised to cut income taxes by 10 per cent; have been increased 
as a result of the imposition of the flat tax.  Saskatchewan now has the 



 

 

highest income tax levels in Canada for middle income families.  Between 
1981 and 1989 there's been an increase of 10 per cent on personal income 
taxes -- not a cut of 10 per cent. 
 
The oil royalty rates is the only area in the government tax-cutting 
platform of 1982 that they have kept and maintained.  That's the only 
promise that they kept since they've been elected in 1982.  And in 1981 
large oil companies in this province paid the province 64.9 per cent of the 
value production in royalties, and in 1989 they paid 21.7 per cent. 
 
In 1981 the province received $532 million in oil royalty revenues, and 
this year, the Government of Saskatchewan is budgeting to receive $252 
million even though the value of production is higher than it was 10 years 
ago.  That is a Tory record when it comes to income taxes in this province.  
No cuts in personal income taxes, no cuts to the fuel tax, no cuts to the 
sales tax, but there sure have been cuts to oil royalties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's look at the debt.  Saskatchewan taxpayers in 1982 on the 
Consolidated Fund didn't owe one red cent.  We didn't owe anything.  We had 
no debt and in fact, Mr. Speaker, we had a $139.2 million surplus. 
 
But let's look what happened.  Let's look what happened when the Tories 
came to office.  In 1983 they had a .227 billion dollar deficit; in 1984, a 
.559 billion dollar deficit; in 1980 -- or pardon me '84-85 -- a .938 
billion dollar deficit; in 1986, the cumulative deficit was $1.5 billion; 
in 1987, $2.7 billion combined deficit; in 1988, a $3.2 billion deficit; in 
1989, a $3.6 billion deficit; 1990, $3.99 billion deficit; 1991, a $4.3 
billion deficit; and this year, our combined cumulative provincial 
budgetary deficit will be $4.618 billion.  What a record, Mr. Speaker.  And 
the annual interest payments on that debt will be $500 million this year.  
That's what they're projecting. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, over a 10-year period the provincial taxpayers in this 
province have paid out $2.6 billion in interest payments to the bond 
dealers and the bankers.  That's what the record of this government is.  
The government's record in this province . . . I use the term taxed to 
death and buried in debt.  That's what the record of this government has 
been. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some people over there will argue we have to have, we 
have to have this harmonized provincial goods and services tax in order to 
pay for the debt.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say to you and all members 
listening, and the public listening, that if this government wanted to come 
to terms with its debt, it would look at its own fiscal waste and 
mismanagement and that's where we'd start to come to terms with the debt, 
not by taxing and taxing and taxing and taxing the working men and women of 
this province.  That's not how you deal with a debt.  You look at yourself 
first. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after nine years of financial mismanagement, Saskatchewan 
simply can't afford four more years of this government.  The PC government 
have failed to provide a fair taxation policy.  They failed to control the 
deficit.  They failed to control waste and mismanagement.  They failed to 



 

 

improve the economic base of our small towns.  And they failed to provide 
sufficient job opportunities to our young people and working people.  And 
they have failed, they have failed the farm community of this province. 
 
The PC government have given big favours to their big PC corporate friends, 
but they certainly have done no favours for the people of this province.  
Instead, Mr. Speaker, instead what they have given us is nine years of 
waste and mismanagement, nine years of deficits, and nine years of tax 
increases. 
 
The new provincial goods and services tax which we are debating today is a 
result of their waste and mismanagement.  Their waste and mismanagement, 
their incompetence is causing us to debate this Bill today.  This 
government has no right, no right to impose this new tax without letting 
the people of this province vote first to decide whether or not they want 
four more years of waste and mismanagement, four more years of 
incompetence. 
 
This new provincial goods and services tax, Mr. Speaker, is a disaster to 
the working men and women of this province.  It is a disaster to the 
business people of this province.  It means lost jobs and it means more 
bankruptcies.  It certainly will never, ever raise the kind of money that 
they say it's going to raise because people simply aren't going to be 
working and people simply aren't going to be paying this tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, we believe that this tax should be reversed 
for two reasons: one, the PST is doing grave harm to the provincial 
economy; and two, Mr. Speaker, the harmonized provincial sales tax is an 
unfair tax because it hits the lower and middle income earners the hardest. 
 
And I want to talk about the harm to the provincial economy.  If you look 
at the various headlines that have been in our papers and if any of the 
members opposite would care to speak to the small-business community in 
this province, they would learn firsthand what has happened to the economy 
since April 1 of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I have to do is look at a press release that was issued by 
the Saskatchewan Business Coalition to STOP the Provincial Sales Tax.  This 
press release was issued on May 21, 1991, some seven weeks after the 
imposition of this sales tax on goods in this province.  And this is what 
this press release says, and I quote: 
 

 Sales in the general retail service sector are down sharply . . . As a 
result people have lost their jobs or had their hours of work cut back, 
due to these lower sales.  Some businesses have been forced to close their 
doors, some have gone bankrupt, many more will face the same demise in the 
next few months -- the P.S.T. being the last straw in an already 
underperforming provincial economy . . .  

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is go down Main Street any place in 
Saskatchewan, speak to local merchants and they will tell you that their 



 

 

sales are down, they've cut back hours, and they've cut back staff, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(2045) 
 
And the other day I had the opportunity to be in a meeting of several 
people who have businesses in the southern part of Saskatchewan.  And with 
those seven merchants, Mr. Speaker, they advised us that they had laid off 
in excess of 12 people.  That's 12 jobs in rural Saskatchewan, if the 
Minister of Agriculture would like to listen.  That's 12 jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan, and many of their staff have had their hours cut.  And we 
talk about Fair Share Saskatchewan where city jobs are going to be moving 
out to the country.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the jobs in the country are being 
lost because of this provincial sales tax which the government likes to say 
will pay for GRIP and NISA.  But I will predict this:  that this tax will 
never raise the kind of money that the government has talked about in their 
documents on this new tax. 
 
The Minister of Finance talks about the impact of harmonization in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  He talks about some 7,000 new jobs.  Well those 
7,000 new jobs are not going to materialize, and we are seeing job after 
job being lost all over Saskatchewan because of this tax.  So that's one 
press release that we've seen from the business community. 
 
Another press release comes from the used-car dealers.  And the used-car 
dealers are saying that at least half of Saskatchewan used-car dealers will 
shut their doors permanently next year if the government goes ahead with 
tax harmonization.  They say and I quote, and this is in the Regina 
Leader-Post on Thursday, May 23, 1991: Our business is already down 50 per 
cent since January 1 when the federal GST of 7 per cent kicked in, and I 
know of three dealers who will shut down before January 1 if nothing is 
done. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, once again used-car dealers provide jobs to Saskatchewan 
people.  They provide an important service to those of us who can't afford 
new cars.  And when we have the used-car dealers telling us that they're 
going down the tubes because of this tax, then I think it's time, it's 
time, Mr. Speaker, that we got rid of this tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have another tax . . . or another tax revolt story that 
appears in the Saskatoon -- or pardon me, the Regina Leader-Post -- and 
it's dated Friday, March 8, 1991.  And this particular headline reads 
"Restaurateurs ready to revolt."  And, Mr. Speaker, the restaurateurs in 
this province are telling us that restaurants are going under.  They're 
laying off staff.  Their business is down.  And they are fed up with this 
tax, and they want the government to acquiesce because the provincial 
economy cannot afford another 7 per cent being pulled out of the 
pocket-books and purses of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to read one particular headline, and it says: 
 

 "If I have to be a martyr, I'll do it," said Tom Morris, manager of Champs 
Steak House and Sports Lounge in Moose Jaw, vowing to be one of those who 



 

 

will not collect a provincial GST on restaurant meals. 
 
 The bottom line is, we don't want to collect it, we don't want to pay it, 

we don't want anything to do with it. 
 

And Mr. Morris's sentiments can be heard ringing all across the province of 
Saskatchewan.  People don't want to collect the tax, people don't want to 
pay for the tax, and people want this tax gone. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have another headline, and this headline comes shortly 
after the Minister of Finance made his famous announcement in February of 
1991.  And, Mr. Speaker, what this particular headline talks about: "Tax 
hikes infuriate embattled consumers," February 21, 1991 Leader-Post 
article. 
 
And this woman says, "I don't think Mr. and Mrs. Average Saskatchewan will 
be very happy about this," said Joyce Glen, browsing for clothes in the 
women's fashion section of Eaton's in the Cornwall Centre: 
 

 I know that the country and the province are in desperate shape 
financially, but I really think they should look at cutting their spending 
before taxing us more.  I just feel we are taxed too much as it is. 

 
And then we have another fellow by the name of Craig Hemingway, looking at 
books about sports in Coles bookstore.  He says, and I quote, "The 
provincial government is forcing Saskatchewan residents to carry the burden 
of its financial mismanagement."  My point exactly.  "There aren't a lot of 
other options, but they seem to spend quite foolishly.  I don't think we 
should have to pay for their mistakes." 
 
And that's exactly what's happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The people of this 
province are now being asked to pay for their financial mistakes.  These 
are the people that trotted on to the political scene in 1982 saying, elect 
us, elect us; we're the business people of this province.  We want to run 
the province; we can do a better job. 
 
And what have they done?  What have they done?  Nine straight years of 
deficit budgeting, $4.6 billion of red ink running down the main streets of 
Saskatchewan, tax increase after tax increase, incompetence, mismanagement, 
and waste.  That is the record of this government opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the headlines all across the country, the 
kind of impact the federal GST has had, all we have to do is go through 
press clipping after press clipping and we will see that the federal GST 
has wreaked havoc on the federal national economy, and once this new 
harmonized provincial sales tax comes into effect on January 1, we will see 
an economy that will shrink even more than it already has.  We will see 
more lay-offs, we will see more people exiting this province, and this 
province simply can't afford this tax at this time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our leader, the member from Riversdale, had the 
opportunity to speak to a number of business people in Saskatoon a couple 
of weeks ago.  And at that time he released a study that was done by our 



 

 

research staff in Regina.  And I would suggest to anybody who's watching 
tonight's proceedings, if you're interested in having a copy of this paper, 
all you have to do is phone our caucus office at 787-1882 -- you can call 
collect -- and we will send you out a copy of this document, because this 
document suggests, and it's confirmed by a couple of economists as well as 
a head of a very large business group in Saskatchewan, that there will be a 
serious, negative, economic impact upon the provincial economy. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Everything's negative over there. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Now the member over there from Shaunavon pipes from his 
chair that everything's negative over here.  Well I just want to tell you 
this much.  What the people of this province would really like to see 
happen in order to have some positive thinking, to move from a 
negative-thinking mode to a positive-thinking mode, is an election.  And if 
you guys could screw up your courage to call an election, there'd be a lot 
of positive thought emanating from every corner of Saskatchewan because we 
would finally be put out of our misery and we would be rid of you people.  
So call the election. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the economic impact on our province.  Let's look at 
tourism.  If you look at what the Alliance of Canadian Travel Associations 
has said about the impact of the new provincial GST on travel and tourism 
in our provincial economy, they have said that, and I quote: 
 

 . . . "tourism in this province will suffer greatly as a result of the 
P.S.T.", and that "the end result will be lost jobs, and ultimately lost 
revenue for the province of Saskatchewan."  (Lost revenue.)  The 
Association has concluded that "the application of the Provincial Sales 
Tax in the travel industry would be detrimental to that sector of the 
(provincial) . . . economy to the point of being counter-productive." 

 
And it would be interesting if the Minister of Transportation would pay 
attention to this because it will have a serious impact upon his particular 
area of expertise. 
 
Now in addition, concerns have been expressed by other people in the 
business community that this new tax increase, Mr. Speaker, will lead to a 
furthering of the underground economy.  And what will happen is people will 
not collect the tax from consumers and they won't remit that tax to 
provincial treasury, and all that does is impose a further competitive 
disadvantage on legitimate businesses which comply with the law.  And for 
these reasons, Mr. Speaker, three-quarters of the provincial economy that 
is domestic conduction and consumption will be adversely affected by the 
new provincial goods and services tax.  And that particular sector, Mr. 
Speaker, will experience job losses. 
 
Now the net effect on jobs -- the people over there like to suggest that 
we're going to see a number of new jobs created.  What our paper shows is 
that the impact of the new provincial GST on some sectors may result in 
some job growth; job growth as much as one and one-half per cent commencing 
in 1992.  But we will also see a much larger proportion result in a net 
loss of jobs, and we could very well see a loss of 8,225 jobs in the next 



 

 

four years. 
 
The overall impact -- when you take the job positives that will result with 
the job negatives -- we will see a net loss of some 7,500 jobs, Mr. 
Speaker.  And what that will pull out of the economy is some $450 million 
per year by 1995.  Now this tax is supposed to collect $440 million 
according to the financial wizards over on that side of the House.  What 
we're saying is that there will be 7,500 jobs lost with a net decrease to 
the provincial economy of some $450 million per year. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this tax does not make sense.  It will not collect the 
kinds of moneys to pay for GRIP and NISA that these people like to think 
it's going to do.  It simply will not because there'll be 7,500 fewer 
people working in this province, 7,500 fewer people paying taxes in this 
province, 7,500 people fewer buying goods and services in this province 
because of this government's decision to impose this unfair tax.  So, Mr. 
Speaker, what we argue is that this is not the way to go about dealing with 
our provincial economy. 
 
Now these people will say, well where are you going to get the money?  Well 
I'd like to talk about where we could get the money for some of these 
projects that the government talks about.  They say that GRIP and NISA will 
cost some $120 million.  All they have to do, Mr. Speaker -- and we've done 
a very rough estimate of how we could save $100 million right like that -- 
and all they have to do is go through their departments and cut out some of 
the waste and mismanagement kinds of spending that's gone on in this 
province in the last nine years and which will go on in this province this 
year. 
 
I understand that every minister has a public relations budget and every 
minister is given a very large sum of money to communicate with the public.  
Well all they would have to do, Mr. Minister, is cut out $2 million in each 
department on this kind of government propaganda and they could have a 
fairly significant amount of money to help pay for GRIP and NISA. 
 
The other thing that they might want to do is to collect on some of the 
privatization deals that have happened in this province.  Now we have had a 
lot of property sold in this province under privatization.  And you know 
what?  You haven't collected very much money.  We have had in excess, I 
believe, of some $3 billion in public assets sold off and we still don't 
know to this day how much money you've received from those assets.  I know 
this:  that from Prince Albert pulp and paper mill . . . this particular 
asset was valued at $248 million.  You sold it for $236 million, but you've 
never collected one red cent from Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington. 
 
Now you know, if we could even collect the interest on the money, I mean 
that might be some $25 million per year.  But they can't even do that, Mr. 
Speaker.  These great financial business types from across the way can't 
even collect on the money that is owed us. 
 
And then we have Saskoil.  They sold off this particular asset for some 
$300 million.  We still don't know what the sale price was.  We still don't 
know how much money was collected.  Some people think 70 million; some, 35 



 

 

million, but we've never been told.  And we have never, ever had an 
accounting in this province of the public assets that were sold off and how 
much actual cash in the pocket the taxpayers of Saskatchewan actually got. 
 
(2100) 
 
But we do know this about Saskoil.  They had profits in 1983 and 1984 
amounting to $80 million when it was a public corporation, a Crown 
corporation, but since privatization it has not paid any dividends to the 
taxpayers although, Mr. Speaker, by 1989 that asset was worth $1 billion. 
 
And let's look at Sask Mineral.  Here's a little company that had a book 
value of 21 million, and they sold it for 15 million to Kam-Kotia Mines and 
Premier Cdn from Quebec, and this little company was established in 1946.  
It returned over $47.5 million.  We think that the operation down at 
Chaplin may be going under.  We don't know.  It's been sold we think, but 
we don't know.  And, Mr. Speaker, very little bit of money returned on that 
particular asset.  We know that there have been jobs lost in rural 
Saskatchewan with the privatization of that particular little Crown 
corporation, and we know that there has been very little money returned to 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And then we have the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  Now this is a 
Crown corporation that was estimated to have a value of $2.4 billion in 
1987.  We think the sale price was 630 million.  We don't know how much the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan got because they have never given us a proper 
accounting.  They have never given us a proper accounting of how much money 
we got for that particular sell-off. 
 
We know this though.  We know the original cost of those mines was $413 
million.  We know that between 1976 and 1982 under an NDP government that 
PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) made profits of $414 million; that 
they paid $270 million in taxes and royalties to the people of this 
province, and the Associate Minister of Agriculture shakes his little head.  
Read the annual reports, Mr. Minister.  Don't shake your head until you 
know what you're talking about.  And I can tell you this, that they paid 
another $100 million in dividends but not 1 cent since privatization. 
 
We do know that Chuck Childers, the new president of PCS has a little 
contract worth $740,000 per year; close to $1 million per year, he's paid 
by the people of this province.  We do know that.  We do know that there's 
no other public employee anywhere in this province that makes that kind of 
money.  And I consider Mr. Childers a public employee because the people of 
this province still have equity in that Crown corporation. 
 
And then we have Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation which was sold 
off.  It had a book value of $3.9 million in 1980.  This became the 
WESTBRIDGE Computer company.  We understand that things are not too good 
over at WESTBRIDGE Computer.  We understand that IBM may be buying this 
little Saskatchewan company.  We do know that the fixed assets in that 
company were some $17 million.  We do know that they had a tremendous 
return on equity over the years but not a penny is to be found these days. 
 



 

 

And then we have SaskTel and the Saskatchewan Government Printing and of 
course SaskPower.  Now, this was a brilliant privatization.  SaskPower has 
$984 million in natural gas reserves, some 510 billion cubic feet.  
SaskPower sells this to Saskoil, but do they get the money?  No, they don't 
get the money; they get shares that are continued to be diluted.  We didn't 
get much money, yet we've just given them $1 billion in natural gas 
reserves.  We do know that SaskPower sold off the Poplar River coal mine to 
Manalta Coal for some $102 million and then we entered into long-term 
contracts with Manalta Coal for coal to fuel the Poplar River power 
project.  We do know that its drag-line was sold, once again to Manalta, 
for some 45 million.  But it's being used to get coal for the Poplar River 
power station.  We never did know what the estimated value of that 
particular drag-line was.  And on and on and on it goes. 
 
So what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is billions of dollars in public assets 
that have been built up over the years by the people of this province, sold 
off, and we do not have a proper accounting of how much money the taxpayers 
of this province ever received for these particular assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to speak to someone who knows something 
about economics.  He's an economist.  And he's had the opportunity to look 
at our estimates.  And he's had an opportunity to look at our public 
accounts.  And he said: I don't understand where all the money went.  I 
don't understand where all the money went.  There's no accounting for where 
all the money went. 
 
And that is the point, Mr. Speaker.  That is the point.  We've had 
horrendous tax increases.  We've had horrendous deficits in this province.  
We can't see anything for what this government was supposed to have spent 
our money on. 
 
And the question people are asking and the question they will ask in the 
next election is, where has all the money gone?  And you people are going 
to have to answer that question.  Where has all the money gone?  And the 
answer will be, they don't know.  They don't know.  And the Provincial 
Auditor doesn't know, and this economist doesn't know.  And if you show the 
Public Accounts to accountants they don't know; they can't figure it out. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we have about $4.5 billion in revenues that are 
raised every year in this province -- 4.5 billion.  And if a government of 
the day cannot live on $4.5 billion, with a population of less than a 
million, then there is something wrong.  There is something wrong in 
Regina. 
 
And the day will soon come when a government will be elected that will do 
what the people of this province have always done, and that's learn to live 
within your means.  That's what the people of this province have done.  And 
successive CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), Liberal, and NDP 
(New Democratic Party)  
 Dgovernments knew how to make a lot out of nothing.  They knew how to make 
a lot out of nothing.  With very little money we built a fantastic 
province. 
 



 

 

We built highways and a telephone system and a power system and hospitals 
and schools all over Saskatchewan.  We did that with very little money.  We 
did it without a deficit budget.  The people of the province knew where 
their money was going, they could see it around Saskatchewan, but not this 
operation, not this operation.  They have paid money out to their Tory 
friends on big contracts.  They have paid money out to people outside of 
the province.  They have literally wasted billions of dollars.  And the 
people of this province will say to you on election day, enough is enough, 
the time has come, we will not have any more Conservatives in the province 
of Saskatchewan running our government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to the credit rating of this 
province.  Once again the people of this province in 1982 elected a 
government that they thought was going to lower personal income taxes, get 
rid of the fuel tax, lower the provincial sales tax, eliminate the 
provincial sales tax, and run the government like they'd run their own home 
or own business or own farm. 
 
But that's not what we've had in this province in the last nine years.  And 
if you look at the credit rating that has . . . The credit rating agencies 
have lowered our credit rating in this province several times since 1982.  
Mr. Speaker, each credit rating agency has its own methodology for rating a 
province or a jurisdiction's credit rating.  And Moody's, for instance, Mr. 
Speaker, has downgraded us since 1985 from a AA1 to an A2.  Standard and 
Poor's has downgraded us from a AA to an A.  And the Dominion Bond Rating 
Service has also lowered us, and the Canadian Bond Rating Service has 
lowered us from a AA to a AA minus. 
 
Now the point is that your credit rating affects your ability to borrow 
money.  And when you have red ink flowing out of Regina, out of the 
government offices of the cabinet ministers and the Premier, and flowing 
down the streets of Main Street on to the farms -- because that's what we 
have; we have red ink from one end of this province to the other because of 
PC mismanagement and fiscal irresponsibility -- what that does, Mr. 
Speaker, is when we go to renew some of our long-term debt, we're going to 
have to pay a higher interest rate. 
 
Now this province in 1982, I believe, had a AAA rating -- a AAA.  We were 
one of the finest . . . we had one of the finest credit ratings in all of 
North America.  And I understand, Mr. Speaker, that our credit rating is 
soon going to be lowered again.  And it's going to be lowered again because 
of this government's irresponsible behaviour.  That's what's going to 
happen.  And it's time, Mr. Speaker, that we elected some people that know 
how to run a government.  And it seems to me that we've had nine years to 
see how these people would run a government.  And, Mr. Speaker, we're not 
happy. We're not happy with the way these people have run the fiscal 
affairs of the Government of Saskatchewan on behalf of the taxpayers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to reiterate some of the problems that we 
have seen.  We've seen nine years of fiscal mismanagement.  We've seen a 
failed taxation policy.  We've seen a deficit that's out of control.  We've 
seen out-of-control waste and mismanagement.  We've seen no improvement in 
small town Saskatchewan.  We've seen no improvement on the farms, and we've 



 

 

seen no improvement when it comes to providing job opportunities for our 
people. 
 
We've seen a government that seems to enter into these schemes with some of 
these out-of-province types that come here.  And they've tried to curry 
favour with some of these groups.  And I would say that these groups have 
seen some of these people coming and we've been taken advantage of.  Well I 
say, Mr. Speaker, instead of ramming through this provincial sales tax, the 
government should eliminate its waste and mismanagement.  It should 
eliminate its wasteful spending and examine other revenue sources. 
 
Now what would we do?  The first thing we would do, Mr. Speaker, is we 
would open the books.  We want to find out the true extent of the problem.  
And that's why, Mr. Speaker, we have said that if we are elected after the 
next election, we will open the books and we will conduct a full review of 
the financial situation in this province.  We have to know exactly how bad 
things are and settle on new priorities for the 1990s. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, we need to put a priority into stimulating the 
provincial economy and creating jobs.  We believe, Mr. Speaker, that there 
are all kinds of visionaries in this province that have all kinds of ideas 
for new jobs, and those ideas for new jobs must be pursued, Mr. Speaker.  
The days of megaprojects like Rafferty-Alameda are over. 
 
The 1990s, Mr. Speaker, will look to Main Street and small businesses to 
create wealth, Mr. Speaker.  We will target local entrepreneurs to maximize 
profits, and their export opportunities will be great under a new 
government.  And their export opportunities and their creativity and 
vitality will create jobs for the people of this province.  The key, Mr. 
Speaker, will be new jobs and economic growth, and that will mean increased 
revenue for everyone, without tax increases. 
 
The third thing we will do, Mr. Speaker, is we will end, we will put an end 
to government waste and mismanagement.  We have to get careless government 
spending under control.  The provincial government this year will spend 
some $4.8 billion in a province of 1 million people.  We have to ask 
ourselves: without going into debt, isn't $4.5 billion enough to get the 
job done in 1991?  And we say $4.5 billion is quite enough, thank you very 
much.  It's time to get your fiscal house in order. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that we, upon opening the books, we will find many 
many areas of government wasteful spending that we can redirect to other 
areas of our province.  We've identified over $100 million in wasteful 
spending and that kind of waste and mismanagement will be cut. 
 
For example, if we cut 80 per cent in government advertising we'd save 
$17.6 million a year.  If we cut 66 per cent in printing . . . the stuff 
that comes out of some of these offices is unbelievable.  One year, Mr. 
Speaker, I kept track and I had three bins full of government propaganda.  
It was not the kind of stuff that you would find any information on; it was 
just material.  Lots of trees had been cut down; lots of materials that 
were simply propaganda.  And, Mr. Speaker, even if we had a 25 per cent cut 
in leased office space we could save some $17.7 million. 



 

 

 
(2115) 
 
Now the government claims that this massive new tax increase is required to 
pay the provincial share of the GRIP and NISA programs.  That's simply not 
true.  We believe the government of Saskatchewan has a choice.  It can 
choose to raise more taxes or it can choose to cut its own wasteful 
spending.  We're committed to finance GRIP and NISA.  There's no question 
about that.  But we will get the money by cutting waste and mismanagement, 
not through higher taxes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that we will do is, we are going to 
review, we are going to review every privatization deal that has taken 
place in this province.  We are going to go through those deals with a 
fine-tooth comb and we're going to ask ourselves if they were done 
prudently and economically.  If not then we will need to negotiate with a 
view to maximizing the revenues for the people of this province.  For sure, 
Mr. Speaker, we need to ask a lot of questions about the Weyerhaeuser deal.  
They still haven't made a payment to the province on the $236 million 
no-interest loan it received five years ago. 
 
The other thing that we're going to do is we're going to try and put a stop 
to federal off-loading.  In recent years . . . and these people can laugh, 
they can laugh.  Their kissing cousins down in Ottawa are sticking it to 
the taxpayers of this province and what are they doing?  They sit here in 
their chairs and they laugh. 
 
Instead of standing up for Saskatchewan people you guys put your heads down 
and say yes Brian, yes Brian, anything you say, Mr. Mulroney.  Well there's 
no sense in doing that.  Just kowtowing to your cousin in Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker, is not going to do one thing for the people of this province.  The 
people of this province want a government that will stand up to Brian 
Mulroney and say, enough is enough.  The West has paid its share.  It's 
time to cough up. 
 
And as a result, Mr. Speaker, we have seen federal transfer payments to our 
province down by more than $423 million a year in each of the last three 
years.  Now the boys over there say, and will Brian ever bow to that.  Well 
he certainly won't bow down to people who keep their lips shut, and that's 
what we've seen out of you guys ever since I was elected in 1986.  I have 
never seen you stand up to Ottawa.  You didn't stand up to Ottawa on the 
GST; you didn't stand up to Ottawa on the Free Trade Agreement; you did not 
stand up to Ottawa on cuts to transfer payments; you did not stand up to 
Ottawa on cuts to the EPF (established programs financing).  You've done 
nothing.  You have sat here and done nothing.  In my view, Mr. Speaker, 
they have been useless in the West's fight with Ottawa, absolutely useless. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these measures of opening the books, reordering 
government spending priorities, job creation, cutting waste and 
mismanagement, finding new revenues from PC privatizations, and fighting 
federal off-loading -- which these people have never done -- these are the 
ways that we can better manage some of Saskatchewan's resources.  That's 
what we say, Mr. Speaker.  The Devine government's imprudence, its lack of 



 

 

a long-term economic plan, have given Saskatchewan several years of budget 
deficits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the solution is not more of the same.  We cannot have more of 
the same.  We need to do things differently in this province if this 
province is to survive the 1990s.  Their economic direction has not been 
good for this province.  We have seen 75,000 citizens leave Saskatchewan.  
We have seen thousands of farmers go down the tubes.  We have seen 
thousands of business people go down the tubes.  We have seen businesses 
dry up on Main Street all over Saskatchewan.  This situation can no longer 
be. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this government should put its plans on hold for 
the new provincial sales tax, put it on hold until after the next election.  
Let the people of Saskatchewan decide whether or not they want this tax.  I 
would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, they do not.  They do not want this tax.  
They want this tax axed.  This tax is harmful to the economy.  It will not 
raise the money that they've talked about; it will not raise $440 million, 
as they've talked.  It will in fact lose $450 million.  It will lose 7,500 
jobs.  It will bankrupt many businesses.  Businesses will go down the 
tubes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the wrong tax at the wrong time put in by a misguided and wrong 
government.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's time the Tories over there started 
listening to the tens of thousands of people that are saying: axe the tax; 
enough is enough; call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've already spoken on 
the Bill.  I'll be brief this evening.  I want to say this, Mr. Speaker: 
it's very unusual that the NDP would bring into this Assembly this evening 
an amendment that would delay the passage of this Bill for six months.  It 
is quite clear that the NDP intend to be government six months from now, 
and there is something clearer in their indication that while they say they 
oppose the Bill, they want to put off the Bill for six months. 
 
And I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP really do not intend to ever do 
anything else than impose this tax but only in a harsher way upon the 
people of Saskatchewan.  The NDP, I believe, are again, as they have done 
for many, many years, Mr. Speaker, saying one thing when they really intend 
to do something else. 
 
My father tells a story, Mr. Speaker, of when he was a young man he 
remembers voting for Tommy Douglas and he was somewhat disillusioned 
because Mr. Douglas campaigned against the health or education tax at the 
time.  My father's recollection of the story is that Mr. Douglas said it 
was an evil tax, and he would abolish it.  And then my father recalls that 
after Mr. Douglas was elected he actually raised it. 
 
Well I recall, Mr. Speaker, that in 1979 the federal government in Canada 
fell because they wished to impose an 18 cent per gallon tax on gasoline.  
And Pierre Trudeau denounced it, denounced it totally, and right thereafter 



 

 

won an election denouncing the tax, and then virtually doubled it, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I believe what you have here before you in this amendment is 
the NDP clearly showing us what they intend to do in this province should 
they ever attain power. 
 
We have come up front and said the bills have to be paid.  This is a fairer 
tax than taxing income tax even more.  This is a fairer tax than taxing 
production and the earning of income to a greater extent.  This is a tax 
that encourages production and growth in the economy, that creates jobs, 
creates prosperity.  Then you have the sufficient prosperity to pay for the 
social programs we have become accustomed to. 
 
But what is happening in other countries?  I remember when the NDP used to 
go to Socialist International conventions every year, and you used to read 
about it in the paper.  Now I've been trying to locate the nearest 
convention so that I can see what the current policy of Socialist 
International is.  Mr. Speaker, I can't seem to ascertain where Socialist 
International is meeting this year.  I don't know if it's in Havana, Cuba 
or if it's in Albania.  I don't know if the Soviet Union even wants the 
convention in the Eastern bloc. 
 
But the members opposite here still haven't renounced socialism.  When the 
world has renounced socialism the members opposite have not renounced 
socialism.  They still refer to themselves as democratic socialists.  Well 
what did the democratic socialists do in 50 years in Sweden?  You don't 
hear the members opposite talk about Sweden any more and the wonders of the 
Swedish economy.  It just so happens that yes, Sweden does have social 
programs, but Sweden also has the highest taxes in the entire world, Mr. 
Speaker.  Sweden, the jewel of the socialists. 
 
Sweden, that country has the highest taxes in the world.  I met with the 
ambassador from Sweden recently and he tells me that they want to, believe 
it or not, join the European Common Market.  They feel they have to be part 
of a larger market.  I saw a report on Sweden yesterday on television.  It 
indicated that they were interviewing people walking down the street in 
Sweden, and they said, our taxes are too high, we can't compete with the 
other countries in Europe.  They said, we have to have the same kind of 
system as the rest of the world has.  The people in Sweden indicated they 
could no longer afford the welfare state. 
 
What about Holland?  It seems that in Holland -- where they've gone to 
socialistic policies with a welfare state as the NDP have brought to us in 
this province, as they project in Ontario where they increased spending on 
welfare by 40 per cent in their most recent budget -- that kind of a 
situation in Holland has got to the state where they predict that if they 
continue that system for another 10 years they will only have one worker 
for every person receiving benefits from the state.  That means that every 
worker in Holland will give half of their entire production to someone who 
has chosen not to work. 
 
There's a difference between helping those people who cannot help 
themselves; there's a difference between providing education to children, 
and outright giving money to people who have, as the members opposite have 



 

 

said in the past, have a right not to work, a right to collect benefits 
from the state. 
 
Well who is the state?  The government, Mr. Speaker, is all of the people.  
The government does not exist here in Regina with a vault of gold in the 
basement of this particular building that they can hand out to people at 
will.  The government has to take money out of people's pockets and then 
put it in other people's pockets. 
 
And there's allegations of waste.  Well there is very little waste.  I can 
tell you that any money wasted in this province was wasted on the people, 
Mr. Speaker; it was not wasted on the government.  So while we try to run 
more efficiently, there is a great debate over what money that has been 
spent on the people was actually wasted. 
 
Well, the members opposite don't want want to talk about Sweden any more.  
They don't want to talk about social democracy any more.  They don't even 
want to . . . and I challenge them; they heckle from their seats.  I 
challenge them to tell me where's the next convention of Socialist 
International so that I follow and see how they are going to save the 
world. 
 
Well what I say, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan is this: if you 
don't like taxes, then you're in the majority.  I don't like paying taxes 
either.  But I say to the people of Saskatchewan, welcome to the welfare 
state, welcome to what Tommy Douglas said he would give us.  He said, I 
will take you to the new Jerusalem. 
 
Well, this is it, Mr. Speaker.  This province is as socialized, it has got 
as many social programs, as anywhere in Canada, and it has more than it can 
afford.  And we have a difficult choice now.  We have to either reduce that 
expenditure or we have to increase taxes.  This government has had a 
hold-the-line budget.  It has tried to reduce the expenditure and it has 
had the task of raising taxes to pay for the welfare state that has been 
created over the last 45 years in this country. 
 
And people will have to realize that you cannot receive something for 
nothing.  And you cannot tax the rich in Saskatchewan.  I've challenged 
people in my constituency to point out the rich in my constituency and 
we'll tax them.  And they can't be found, Mr. Speaker.  Why?  Because they 
haven't had an opportunity to function in a free-market economy where they 
could develop some wealth that you could at least tax. 
 
Instead, those people who had the ability to create jobs, to create wealth, 
they fled this province.  They fled to Alberta, they fled to British 
Columbia, they once fled to Ontario, but they're fleeing back now.  But 
that is exactly what has happened to this province.  If you say you're 
going to tax the rich, I can tell you this: they are hard to find in this 
province because in the past they have been chased away from this province.  
They have been chased away with gift taxes and succession duties.  What 
happens?  What do you see happening?  There was a union convention in this 
city last week and the members opposite came here and introduced their 
friends in the gallery and then their friends saw fit to disrupt this 



 

 

Assembly so that we could not be heard in this Assembly. 
 
(2130) 
 
But not only that, they brought a professor from Ottawa with them, a tax 
professor.  And then they snuck him onto television, onto The Provincial, 
under the osmosis of being an academic, a learned man, when he was nothing 
but a member of the NDP and the union convention that was in Regina.  And 
do you know what he said on television?  He said, we have to tax the rich; 
we have to bring in succession duties and gift tax.  We can't allow the 
rich to give away their wealth. 
 
Well that's all he's going to do, is what I told the NDP they were doing 
when I quit that party. They were chasing anybody with any initiative out 
of this province.  They don't understand that changing the tax structure in 
this province will give us the same tax structure that is present in Europe 
today.  And why did they have to put that tax structure in in Europe?  To 
pay for the social programs.  And is it 7 per cent?  No, it is from 15 to 
22 per cent; 22 per cent in Sweden. 
 
Now we don't mind paying taxes as long as we get value for our money.  And 
I predict that we will continue to pay taxes and I will predict that if we 
don't decrease our reliance on government, then our taxes will continue to 
go up. 
 
What is a government to do in this province?  The teachers wanted a raise; 
the teachers got a raise.  The nurses wanted a raise; the nurses got a 
raise.  The doctors got a raise; they're back for another raise.  
Government workers wanted a raise; they got a raise of 4 per cent. It's not 
enough.  Farmers don't have money; farmers need money.  Senior citizens 
receive pensions; senior citizens receive heritage grants. 
 
Who's left to pay taxes, Mr. Speaker?  The rich aren't dumb enough to stay 
and pay taxes, so who's going to pay taxes?  Well the citizens of 
Saskatchewan are going to pay taxes because that's all that's left to pay 
taxes.  And unless we have a system that encourages people to stay here and 
create jobs, there are going to be fewer and fewer citizens here to pay the 
taxes and carry the weight. 
 
I mean there was a day when we all said, we have to stop these deficit 
budgets -- our children are going to pay.  Well we were wrong.  We 
calculated . . . we miscalculated by about one generation.  We have to pay.  
The day for my children to pay is not going to come.  We are going to have 
to pay or we are not going to have any services.  And I can tell you this:  
that our children aren't going to be dumb enough to stay here to pay for 
the debts that we run up. 
 
And that means that we have cushioned the people of Saskatchewan as much as 
possible from grain wars.  We have cushioned them with the deficit.  We 
have followed the traditional Keynesian economics of borrowing money in 
difficult times and running a deficit and stimulating the economy, but you 
can only do that so long and after a while you have to say you can't 
stimulate it any more; you have to build it. 



 

 

 
And that's what the members opposite don't understand.  They don't 
understand how you build an economy.  It's all they understand is drag 
somebody down.  Drag somebody down to my level.  Drag him down, look him in 
the eye and say, you worked hard, you studied hard in school, you worked 
late hours and you invested your capital, and you're a bad person because 
you have money.  I'm going to drag you right down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- That's what they promise the people of Saskatchewan, 
rather than encouraging people and saying, good work, keep on building, 
hire 20 more people. We'll take our share of taxes out of consumption 
because they'll be more people to consume here.  No, they want to drag 
people down. 
 
I went to their conventions, Mr. Speaker.  It is a horrible sight to go to 
an NDP convention.  As a matter of fact I could only take four of them, Mr. 
Speaker, four conventions.  Can you imagine the premier of Saskatchewan . . 
. he's no longer elected; I can give his name -- Allan Blakeney.  You know, 
you know how many times I saw him wear blue jeans and eat boloney 
sandwiches, Mr. Speaker?  Once a year at the NDP convention just so that he 
could fit in.  My wife and I sat there in awe.  The first time I went to a 
Conservative convention the attitudinal adjustment was just phenomenal.  I 
mean talk about the hypocrisy of the premier once a year wearing blue jeans 
and eating boloney sandwiches.  Did you ever, I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, outside of being at that convention, did you ever see that 
man in blue jeans, eating a boloney sandwich? 
 
Well what I am saying is that is the way the NDP think, Mr. Speaker.  They 
don't want to build; they don't want to allow people to create wealth; they 
want to drag everyone down.  And they are very selective in their 
calculations.  They ignore $250 million, a reduction in the costs of doing 
business in Saskatchewan.  They ignore that that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and I'm told I'm in error.  I correct myself -- $260 
million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from Regina 
North West says I stink of horse manure.  That is typical of the NDP's 
attitude and respect for people.  I don't even challenge them to withdraw 
that.  I want the people to know exactly, not only what the NDP think but 
what they talk like.  That's what the people need to know.  The people need 
to know what the choices are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I stand here, Mr. Speaker, and I tell you that they 
ignore $260 million of benefits in the reduction of costs, input costs, in 
doing business, in farming in this province -- small business, large 
business.  Those costs do two things.  They make us . . . That reduction 
makes us more competitive.  That means we can earn more income coming into 
this province.  And it also is a reduction in the cost of doing business 
which can be passed on to the consumers. 
 
They also ignore $35 million in benefits to low income families.  People 



 

 

with children, who are not rich, Mr. Speaker -- and I stress not rich -- 
will get their tax back.  The NDP don't notice that. 
 
And then, above all, they come into this Assembly . . . I've told you the 
kind of name-calling they do in this Assembly.  They come into this 
Assembly . . . I can't say in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that they're 
lying.  I can't say that but I can think what I want to think, Mr. Speaker, 
and I can tell the people what the facts are. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  What you can't do is imply 
indirectly what is not permitted directly, and I ask to bring that to your 
attention, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I leave those decisions for the 
people to make their own mind up on those points, but let me say this.  
I've heard this evening the members opposite, I've heard them here say 
Weyerhaeuser Canada purchased the P.A. pulp mill, and I've heard them say 
they haven't paid anything towards the P.A. pulp mill.  Is $65 million not 
anything?  They have paid $65 million to the province of Saskatchewan since 
they bought that pulp mill.  They still owe us money when they make more 
profits. 
 
Listen to this, Mr. Speaker.  When they make more profits they owe us more 
money and they will pay us more money.  But the members opposite would want 
to drag them down, drive them out of the province, and then what will they 
pay us the money with?  Certainly not on losses.  Sixty-five million has 
been paid and instead of $65 million being paid to the province of 
Saskatchewan, we don't have a loss of $91,000 a day any more.  The 
hemorrhaging has stopped.  Sixty-five million dollars has been paid and 
that same corporation has invested in Saskatchewan in excess of $400 
million in new jobs in Prince Albert.  The members opposite don't want the 
new jobs in Prince Albert.  They'd rather have them where -- in British 
Columbia?  Or would they rather have them in Alberta or would they rather 
have Weyerhaeuser building a pulp mill in Brazil?  Where would they rather 
have those jobs -- in Saskatchewan or in other parts of the world? 
 
Well the members opposite with their proposal to raise income tax, with 
their proposal to run corporations and employers out of this province, with 
their example in Ontario of putting on a payroll tax, having an 8 per cent 
tax instead of a 7 per cent tax, their example in Ontario of making such a 
business climate that businesses as large as The Bay are looking at leaving 
Ontario -- that kind of a future government in Saskatchewan would be a 
disaster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the bottom line here today is this: that if the NDP are serious that if 
elected they would revoke this tax, then why do they want to put off this 
tax for six months?  That's what people have to ask themselves.  Why do 
they want to put this tax off for six months if they do not have a hidden 
agenda that is typical of what the NDP have done across Canada -- promised 
one thing and done another. 
 
That's what's happened.  They have one hand behind their back, and they're 
going to come out and they're going to grab the future of this country and 



 

 

the future of this province.  That's their agenda, and that's why I'm 
opposed to the amendment because I think they are showing their true 
colours, that they intend to put this tax on in six months -- but not 7 per 
cent like in Saskatchewan, but 8 per cent like in Ontario.  And that's why 
we'll vote against amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to enter this debate on Bill 
61 tonight, a debate on the merits of the biggest single tax increase in 
the history of the province.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by saying 
that on behalf of my constituents in Saskatoon University that the vast 
majority of people who live in my riding are strongly opposed to the 
expanded provincial PST, or as I often refer to it --  because that's in 
effect what it is going to become, effective January 1 of next year -- the 
provincial GST. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of residents in my riding I have now presented 
over 2,000 signatures from people who live in my constituency to the 
Legislative Assembly, expressing their opposition to this massive tax 
increase.  And, Mr. Speaker, in total, members on this side of the House in 
the New Democratic Party have presented over 100,000 signatures to this 
legislature showing that the people of Saskatchewan right across this 
province oppose this tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the government has to date ignored that massive 
expression of public opposition to this tax increase, Mr. Speaker.  And I 
say they do that at their peril.  But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, they 
do that at the peril of the future of Saskatchewan because this tax 
increase is jeopardizing economic productivity in this province.  This tax 
increase, Mr. Speaker, is driving this province even more deeply into 
recession than it has been to date. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the magnitude of this tax increase is 
really quite overwhelming -- $440 million out of the pockets of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, Saskatchewan consumers, each year.  And all of 
that, Mr. Speaker, from a government who has lost its mandate to govern, 
lost its moral right to govern in this province. 
 
It's true, Mr. Speaker, that its five-year legal mandate has not expired, 
but it is more than four and a half years into its term.  We have a 
tradition in this province of having elections at least every four years.  
This government not only has chosen to ignore that tradition, Mr. Speaker, 
but it's chosen in its dying days of office to bring forward and implement 
a tax increase that it has no mandate to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment for a moment on the unfairness of this 
tax.  And I also want to comment for a moment on the remarks made by the 
member for Melville which I want to take issue with. 
 
But first I want to say, sir, that I believe one of the fundamental 
shortcomings of this tax proposal is that it is basically unfair because it 
taxes the necessities of life.  This in effect, Mr. Speaker . . . what we 



 

 

have seen with the first round of this tax increase, what is . . . we're 
looking here at a two-stage tax increase.  One stage came into effect on 
April 1 of this year.  The second stage comes into effect January 1 next 
year. 
 
Well what we saw with the April 1 stage, sir, is a tax on the basic 
necessities of life, namely food, clothing, and shelter, and a tax on 
knowledge and information.  That's what we saw with this first stage of the 
tax increase. 
 
(2145) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say that it is unfair to tax restaurant meals.  Why 
should someone pay a 7 per cent tax if they go and purchase a lunch at 4 to 
$6?  Why should they pay a tax on that?  That's a tax on food.  Mr. 
Speaker, why should people be paying a tax on an essential item like 
home-heating fuel, their electricity, and their natural gas?  That's 
fundamentally unfair.  Why, Mr. Speaker, should people be paying a tax on 
clothing purchases of less than $300, including clothing purchases on 
behalf of children? 
 
Mr. Speaker, until this tax increase came in, governments in Saskatchewan 
went to great lengths to ensure that there would not be a tax on such 
necessities.  This government, Mr. Speaker, has chosen to depart from that 
tradition and tax these very basic items that people need for their day to 
day survival in our province and in our society.  And that is the wrong 
thing to be doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also I say, Mr. Speaker, that this tax in unfair because it takes no 
account of people's ability to pay.  The senior citizen with a fixed income 
of 7 or $8,000 a year, who goes and purchases a cup of coffee, or buys 
postage stamps, or buys a new hat, pays exactly the same amount of tax on 
those purchases as a millionaire living in the same city buying the same 
essential items, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is again fundamentally wrong.  It's a prime example of regressive 
taxation that members on this side of the House believe is fundamentally 
unwise.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's a tax that is unfair because while resource 
corporations in this province are paying only 12 cents on the dollar in 
royalties for sales on resources that they are selling out of province -- 
only a 12 per cent royalty -- people, when they walk into The Bay or into 
Sears, are going to be paying 14 per cent in consumer tax alone, in sales 
tax alone, between the federal and provincial GST, Mr. Speaker.  That is 
just a prime example of an unfair tax policy. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the member for Melville was saying that his government 
has cushioned Saskatchewan taxpayers up until now.  He was suggesting, Mr. 
Speaker, that somehow Saskatchewan taxpayers have had an easy ride from 
this government until the provincial GST was implemented.  And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, how wrong those remarks were, how inaccurate they were.  
Because, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has robbed Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 



 

 

This is a government, Mr. Speaker, that between 1981 and 1989 increased 
provincial taxes by some 71 per cent during a period when inflation was 48 
per cent, Mr. Speaker -- a 71 per cent increase in provincial taxes between 
1981 and 1989 during a period when inflation was only 48 per cent, sir.  
And the member from Melville suggests that somehow Saskatchewan taxpayers 
were being cushioned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Melville left the impression that corporations 
like Weyerhaeuser in this province, who've benefitted from the PC's 
privatization plan, have been paying their fair share.  He suggested, Mr. 
Speaker, that they have been paying off the cost of the public assets that 
they have acquired, and that they have been paying off moneys that they owe 
to the people of Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say again that 
I fundamentally disagree with the member from Melville, that he has not 
portrayed reality accurately, sir.  Because, Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser 
corporation has not paid a single penny on the $236 million capital asset 
that they acquired.  They have not paid 1 cent on that asset, sir, not 1 
cent. 
 
And the member from Melville who's in the cabinet, who's in the PC cabinet, 
knows that full well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the member's representations in this Assembly have been 
false and he is fully aware of it.  And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
that the member for Melville was inaccurate when he suggested that an NDP 
government would not repeal the provincial GST or the PST. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, he again misrepresented the intentions of the 
opposition in moving this motion for a six-month hoist in the legislation.  
Mr. Speaker, the member from Melville and the member for Shellbrook who's 
talking now and saying . . . The member for Shellbrook is saying, so you're 
going to put it in.  And the member for Shellbrook knows that that is 
simply not the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our party is on record, and our leader is on record, as saying 
clearly that if a New Democratic Party government is elected in the 
province of Saskatchewan after the next provincial election, one of our 
first legislative acts will be to repeal the provincial GST.  And every 
member on this side of the House stands by that commitment, Mr. Speaker; 
every member on this side of the House stands by that commitment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a moment looking more precisely at what 
Bill No. 61 does and what its implications are for the people of 
Saskatchewan.  Because first of all, sir, Bill 51 results in tax increases 
on a number of important items that I would like to make note of. 
 
First, as I've indicated, there is a tax now on children's clothing.  There 
is also a tax on shoes and there is a tax on all adult clothing and shoes 
costing less than $300.  None of those items were taxed before.  There is 
not only a new provincial PST on restaurant meals, there's also a 
provincial PST now on snack foods and a PST on soft drinks.  And those are 



 

 

items that adults and children are paying tax now on daily in Saskatchewan.  
There is a tax on essential items, Mr. Speaker, now like toothpaste and 
diapers and cough syrup.  And books, magazines, and newspaper subscriptions 
are all being taxed now as a result of Bill 61. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, in terms of goods that are being taxed, as I 
indicated, there is a tax on natural gas and electricity, and also a tax on 
new housing construction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the second phase of this tax, the point that I'd particularly like to 
make to the public watching tonight and reading the proceedings later, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the real big tax increase from the PC government is yet to 
come, because on January 1, if the government is re-elected, they have 
already announced, Mr. Speaker, that there will be a tax on all services 
that are currently taxed under the federal GST. 
 
In effect, Mr. Speaker, we will have a federal GST and a provincial GST.  
And this means, Mr. Speaker, that we're going to be seeing a tax on items 
like postage stamps, hair cuts.  We'll see a tax on car repairs.  We'll see 
a tax on used cars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind the members of the Assembly, particularly the PC 
members opposite, their promise, Mr. Speaker, that they would not tax used 
cars.  Well they're bringing their used-car sales tax back effective 
January 1, 1992 if they are re-elected, sir.  That's what they're doing.  
They're once again breaking a promise that they made to members of this 
Assembly and to the public, that this tax on used cars would not return. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with their tax on services they're going to be taxing legal 
services.  They're going to be taxing home repairs.  They're going to be 
taxing funeral services.  They're going to be taxing appliance repairs and 
boat rentals.  They're even going to levy a tax on gravel, Mr. Speaker.  
There is no limit, Mr. Speaker, to this tax grab that is coming, effective 
January 1, 1992, if the government is re-elected. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to put this tax increase in context, to look at 
the tax record of the Government of Saskatchewan for a moment since it was 
elected in 1982. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, this is the government that said in 1982 that it was 
going to eliminate the sales tax.  It was going to eliminate the E&H 
(education and health) tax.  I remember, Mr. Speaker, that the PC candidate 
in my riding who was elected in 1982 and who legitimately defeated me in 
the . . . and took his place in this Assembly, Mr. Rick Folk -- a decent 
man I might say, Mr. Speaker, and one of the few on that side who hasn't 
taken a patronage appointment.  But he campaigned, as did every other PC 
member in this province, on the elimination of the E&H tax. 
 
And what do we have now, Mr. Speaker?  Not only do we have a government 
that chose to increase the E&H tax from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, but we 
now have a government, Mr. Speaker, that has broadened the range of the E&H 
tax in an unprecedented way to in effect tax all necessities, Mr. Speaker, 
in the province of Saskatchewan.  And they've done it without a mandate. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that promised the people of Saskatchewan 
last year in its budget that it was opposed to the federal GST.  It said it 
was a bad idea.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, to quote from the last year's budget 
address by the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Finance said last year, 
and I quote: 
 

 Loudly and clearly taxpayers throughout Saskatchewan are saying that tax 
increases are not acceptable. 

 
That's what he said, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the federal GST.  He 
said, and I go on to quote:  Quite simply, the people have said they have 
no more to give.  The goods and services tax is unacceptable -- enough is 
enough. 
 
That is what the Minister of Finance said last year, Mr. Speaker.  The 
Minister of Finance has broken his word to the people of Saskatchewan.  Not 
only, Mr. Speaker, has he given up opposing the federal GST, but now, Mr. 
Speaker, he brings to the people of Saskatchewan a brand-new provincial 
GST, a brand-new provincial GST, Mr. Speaker.  We say that the Minister of 
Finance was right last year.  He should have stood by his word.  Enough is 
enough -- drop this tax.  That's what we say on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a great many more things that I 
wish to say with respect to this Bill, but I see it's almost 10 o'clock.  
And it being near 10 o'clock, I move that the debate on Bill 61 be 
adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


