





























































Hansard: May 30, 1991


 

 

May 30/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 61 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I passed 
up the opportunity, quite unintentionally, when I rose to my feet to enter 
into debate this afternoon -- perhaps it was an oversight under the emotion 
of the moment -- but this is, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the first 
opportunity that I've had to address the Assembly while you have been in 
the Chair, sir. 
 
I would simply like to, on the record, offer my congratulations to you on 
your election as Speaker.  That is an achievement that I think many of us 
in this Assembly do admire and envy, and I simply want to extend my 
personal congratulations to you. 
 
Also before re-entering into the debate on the subject more formally, Mr. 
Speaker, based on some calls that we've received in our caucus office since 
adjournment and over the supper hour requesting copies of some of the 
information that I've referred to earlier, with your consent, I would 
simply like to once again make reference to those documents and let people 
know how they can get a copy of them if they like. 
 
Documents that I referred to earlier were the document entitled Tax 
Fairness for the 1990's; and secondly, The Economic Impact of the 
Provincial GST on Saskatchewan; and thirdly, as well, Mr. Speaker, there 
may be people who follow the proceedings of the Assembly who are interested 
in receiving copies of the petition that has been used commonly around the 
province, expressing their opposition to the provincial goods and services 
tax and Bill 61 before us now. 
 
Those can all be received, Mr. Speaker, without any cost to citizens of 
Saskatchewan, by sending . . . either by phone or by mail.  If they wanted 
to address a letter simply to the opposition caucus, or, as I have written 
on this envelope addressed to me in front of me, Mr. Speaker, to Glenn 
Hagel, MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), Moose Jaw North, 265 
Legislative Building, Regina, S4S 0B3.  So, 265 Legislative Building, or if 
they want to phone, my number is 787-1886 -- 787-1886.  And the opposition 
caucus does receive collect calls, and we would be happy to send out copies 
of those documents to any citizens of Saskatchewan who'd like to have them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if I may just take about 60 seconds to summarize my 
address thus far, I've said that I stand opposed to Bill 61, the Bill to 
introduce the provincial goods and services tax, for eight reasons.  And so 



 

 

far, Mr. Speaker, I've outlined that I'm opposed because I believe it to be 
unnecessary; simply put, that the government has other choices.  And 
without repeating them, I've described in some detail some frivolous or 
unnecessary expenditures of the government; addressed the matter of tax 
policies, particularly related to natural resources; and thirdly, have made 
some reference to other ways of realizing revenue by expanding the economy. 
 
Secondly, my argument being that the goods and services tax, provincial 
goods and services tax, is unfair because it fails to meet the criteria of 
being progressive.  Thirdly, that the tax is counter-productive.  Rather 
than stimulating our economy it's in fact an economic deterrent here in 
Saskatchewan.  And I'm currently, Mr. Speaker, on my fourth point, that the 
provincial goods and services tax is ill conceived. 
 
I will, following this then, Mr. Speaker, conclude my remarks by entering 
into debate my opinion that the goods and services tax is: number five, 
legally questionable; number six, part of a despicable agenda by the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) government; number seven, that it is introduced 
without a mandate; and finally, number eight, it is a tax which people 
simply cannot afford. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, then having put my previous remarks into context, I'd 
like to conclude my remarks on the point that I make, that I believe the 
provincial goods and services tax is ill conceived, that as I have 
previously said and don't need to repeat in detail, that it is faulty in 
its forecasts, I believe.  The Minister of Finance has referred to it as 
realizing $440 million worth of revenue, $260 million of which would be 
repaid by way of a rebate to businesses.  I make the argument, Mr. Speaker, 
of those businesses being large corporate businesses and not main street 
businesses on Main Street, Saskatchewan. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker -- and I won't repeat it but just on this point -- 
remind the Assembly that I have made the argument that not only is it 
incorrect to say, as the government has, that this tax will create 5,000 
jobs, as ridiculous as that might sound; that in fact over the next five 
years this tax will directly lead to the loss of some 7,500 jobs from the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me just conclude then, Mr. Speaker, my reference to the business rebate 
and the point I was just about completed when we broke, being that I think 
consistent with that old saying, he who pays the piper calls the tune.  The 
benefactors of the business rebate will be those who would be . . . those 
that the Conservative Party would most consider to be their friends. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let us talk a little Tory talk.  Let's talk dollars and 
let's talk about contributions from some of these corporations to the PC 
Party.  I don't intend to do this in much detail unless the members 
opposite feel that they need some convincing, in which case I'm prepared to 
do that. 
 
But maybe if I could just make a few references to Saskatchewan examples, 
Mr. Speaker, related then to Saskatchewan and recognizing that the rebate 
would go to those who pay the largest amount of PST (provincial sales tax) 



 

 

-- and those being of course, ventures, Mr. Speaker, which are purchasing 
equipment and purchasing taxable materials.  Not included in that to any 
large extent at all, Mr. Speaker, are those kinds of businesses that we 
would call mom and pop operations -- mom and pop's corner grocery store or 
mom and pop's clothing store or mom and pop's book store for that matter, 
Mr. Speaker.  And clearly it would not be the typical small business in 
Saskatchewan that would be the recipient in any significant way, but it 
would be the large corporate business that would be the recipient. 
 
And then just tying in too, for example, the Saferco example, Mr. Speaker, 
it seems to me perhaps more than coincidental, although ultimately that's 
for people to decide whether it's coincidental, that this tax policy comes 
from a government that receives . . . a Progressive Conservative Party 
which receives a donation in 1988 from Cargill Limited of some $15,000, 
with their construction being managed by a firm by the name of Stuart 
Olson, Mr. Speaker, who interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, was a 
contributor to the PC Party in 1988 of some $7,500. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, coincidentally, they would suggest -- I find it a brutal 
coincidence at a time when the Saferco fertilizer plant was being 
constructed and the need was there for steel buildings, that a firm in 
Moose Jaw, Fairford industries in my home community just some 20 miles from 
the site, was not even permitted to submit a bid to construct those steel 
buildings.  It was given to ATCO Ltd., Mr. Speaker.  And people will have 
to judge for themselves whether it's pure coincidence that ATCO contributed 
to the PC Party in 1988 some $25,000. 
 
Members opposite, and I won't single them out, Mr. Speaker, have shouted 
over to me other names of some of their friends that are part of their plan 
for developing the economy here in Saskatchewan.  I've heard the name Peter 
Pocklington mentioned.  And I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, when I look 
here, that Gainers Incorporated -- owned by one Peter Pocklington who's 
certainly been a benefactor of largess, financial largess, of this 
government -- Gainers Incorporated, Mr. Speaker, contributed in 1988 some 
$6,462.24 to the PC Party.  Also owned by Peter Pocklington -- and I don't 
know if this is pure coincidence or not -- the Edmonton Oilers Hockey Club, 
Mr. Speaker, contributed $7,000 to the PC coffers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally, unless the members do want more detail, 
Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd., Mr. Speaker, also I would think a significant 
benefactor of the rebate of the PST -- Weyerhaeuser of Canada.  Mr. 
Speaker, Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd., in 1988 made corporate donations to the 
PC Party of some $32,405.08. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite would like more detail I'm happy 
to provide it.  We can do it on the record.  But assuming that they're 
pleased with the information they do have now, we'll just stop there.  And 
I think the point has been made, Mr. Speaker, that when I look at where 
does this kind of policy come from that is attempted to justify reaching 
into the pockets of Saskatchewan people to the tune of an extra $440 
million a year, with $260 million of that said to be a stimulator of the 
economy, where is that money going to go?  It's mainly more than 
interesting coincidence that it goes to those kinds of ventures which seem 



 

 

to be significant supporters of the PC Party. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, finally on this point of the provincial goods and 
services tax being ill conceived, I simply want to say that it comes to 
this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan without any crystal clear 
plan seeming to be in place and with it being part of a well developed 
plan. 
 
I consider it personally a parliamentary slap in the face, I guess is 
probably the clearest way I can express it.  That this is a tax that was 
introduced in a budget that was presented some three weeks after the tax 
was actually in place, and in fact introduced in this Assembly some . . . I 
guess it would be about eight weeks after it was actually announced, Mr. 
Speaker.  But also, Mr. Speaker, that it was introduced in a budget which 
for the first time in Saskatchewan history . . . for the first time in 
Saskatchewan history we had the presentation of a budget in this Assembly 
this year without it being preceded by a Speech from the Throne. 
 
There have been times in past Saskatchewan history where there was a Speech 
from the Throne in the fall and the same legislative session saw a budget 
introduced in the spring.  But never before in the history of our province 
has there been a budget presented in this Assembly without it being 
preceded by a Speech from the Throne.  A Speech from the Throne, it seems 
to me, is something more than just a political nicety or democratic 
tradition.  A Speech from the Throne is the government's statement of its 
assessment of the problems facing the province and it's game plan for 
dealing with those problems over the next year. 
 
Interestingly enough then, I think it can be concluded nothing other, Mr. 
Speaker, than that we are in a legislative session.  Perhaps it was not 
even anticipated to be, and I'll come back to that in a moment. 
 
But clearly it is a session that we are in, dealing with this Bill before 
us now that has lacked from the very beginning a sense of direction, a 
sense of vision, a sense of purpose, and all of which I think goes to 
contribute to the argument that we are debating in this Assembly a tax Bill 
on the provincial goods and services tax which is not part of a well 
thought out and well developed plan, and certainly not well communicated 
and most definitely not well appreciated by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me move then to my next point . . . Well no, just 
before we do, I would like to read into the record, Mr. Speaker, a couple 
of clear statements of implication of this tax by some very, very credible 
sources that I think there is none of us in this Assembly who would 
discredit.  I want to read into the record a portion of a letter addressed 
to me from the Moose Jaw Public Library, Mr. Speaker, and asking that as 
member for Moose Jaw, I do everything I can to oppose this provincial goods 
and services tax on . . . and references to the tax on reading.  Let me 
read in part from the letter, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 
(1915) 
 

 The recently imposed taxes on reading materials are having a devastating 



 

 

effect on library materials budgets.  The imposition of the GST had an 
impact of 3.5% after the refundable portion; however, the Provincial Sales 
Tax at 7% will be far more destructive. 

 
Stop there for a moment, Mr. Speaker.  They're saying the GST (goods and 
services tax) was a real blow but the 7 per cent PST will be far more 
destructive.  It goes on to say: 
 

 The enclosed diagrams which use 1990 figures for the Moose Jaw Public 
Library materials funding illustrate the effect.  If the budget for 1991 
remains at the same level as 1990, the purchasing power of the materials 
budget will be substantially reduced.  This will mean less items purchased 
and less material available for the use of residents. 

 
That's what it means to the library.  And I just want to read in the record 
the last sentence of this letter, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 The importance of a literate, informed electorate cannot be 
underestimated. 

 
To which, Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say, "hear, hear!" 
 
The implications of this tax go far beyond, I think, what the government 
seriously contemplated.  I simply can't believe that our provincial 
government here in Saskatchewan intentionally went ahead to introduce the 
very first tax on reading in Canada, the very first tax on reading in 
Canada, without recognizing that what it was going to do was reduce the 
ability of libraries across the province to provide materials for our 
citizens.  So, Mr. Speaker, I think that again is an indication of an 
ill-conceived tax. 
 
And finally I'll read into the record, Mr. Speaker, just a small excerpt 
from a news release, May 23, from the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax on 
Reading.  As I said before, this government has been very effective at 
stimulating all kinds of organizations to spontaneously come together and 
form coalitions which will have the phrase "against the tax" on them. 
 
This news release, Mr. Speaker, is entitled "Alliance Welcomes NDP 
Statement."  By the way, the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax on Reading 
is made up of a number of provincial and national organizations and 
agencies which represent writers and publishers and booksellers, 
distributors, librarians, and readers all across the province.  There's a 
list of some 55 organizations which I won't take the time of the Assembly 
to read into the record. 
 
And they say in part, and I quote: 
 

 The Alliance is pleased that the New Democratic Party has pledged itself 
not to tax reading.  The Alliance will continue to try to get the same 
commitment from all parties in Saskatchewan. 

 
And I simply say to them, in dealing with the Progressive Conservative 
Party, good luck.  We're with you and we hope that you're successful.  It 



 

 

goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

 The Alliance believes that a Tax On Reading hurts everyone.  Stopping the 
Tax On Reading is essential.  The attempt to tax reading in Quebec as part 
of the GST/PST harmonization was turned back by popular protest. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the same thing will prove to be true here 
in Saskatchewan.  In fact, I think the ultimate victory for the people of 
Saskatchewan would be to see the Progressive Conservative government come 
to its senses and simply withdraw the tax before the election and seek a 
mandate to introduce it in a provincial election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, point number five of my deliberation: I am of the view 
that the provincial goods and services tax is legally questionable.  By 
that I mean that when we look at the record of how it was brought to bear 
and introduced in Saskatchewan on February 20 in a news conference, it 
raised some question about the legality of this tax right from the very 
beginning.  In fact it's kind of interesting and regrettable that here in 
Saskatchewan part of the public commentary on the tax has been to question 
its very legality. 
 
It's also I think despicable, Mr. Speaker, that as part of the introduction 
of this tax the government has already been talking about fining businesses 
for not collecting the tax, which would strike me as being directly 
contradictory to the Charter of Rights of our country which guarantees that 
citizens cannot be punished for legislation which did not exist when they 
committed an act. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, it was put there to say that no government 
could come along, make a law, make it retroactive, and then punish somebody 
for doing something that wasn't law when they did it -- which is precisely 
what our government in Saskatchewan is talking about doing with 
Saskatchewan business people, fining them for not collecting a tax that 
still isn't passed in law. 
 
And I simply want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in the normal way . . . I've 
heard the Minister of Finance say in this Assembly, quite correctly, to say 
in this Assembly, that ministers of Finance have introduced taxes like 
taxes on tobacco on budget night, and saying that, effective tonight at 
midnight the tax is in place. And that happens, and it's occurred a number 
of times.  He's quite correct in that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, I point out two things. Number one, when taxes have been 
introduced that way in the past, they have been introduced right here on 
the floor of the Legislative Assembly, within the chambers of democracy for 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But number two -- and on this argument, I think the more important point, 
Mr. Speaker -- whenever that has been done in the past, it has always been 
done by a government, a minister of Finance who is confident that he or she 
and his or her government enjoys the confidence of the legislature and 
feels assured that at some point during that legislative session the tax 
will pass and then will be enacted retroactively.  And then to make 



 

 

effective later on, the tax will go into effect that night at midnight, 
which is in effect the argument that the Minister of Finance has used in 
this Assembly. 
 
He says, it's been done this way before; so it's a little odd that I called 
a news conference and told the news reporters about it before I ever told 
the legislators or produced any documents.  That's a little odd, he says, 
but it's okay to do it that way.  Strangely enough, Mr. Speaker, this is 
also the highest single tax increase from one single act of the government 
in Saskatchewan history as well -- odd way of doing it. 
 
But I simply say this, Mr. Speaker. I am not of the opinion that in fact 
this government does enjoy the confidence of the legislature when it comes 
to a vote on this tax.  Fact of the matter is, there are four 
constituencies which are vacant in this Assembly.  There are some 45,000 
people who don't even have representation on the floor of the Assembly 
regarding the debate of this tax, which causes one perhaps to question the 
principle of taxation without representation - 
_ the violation of the principle of taxation with representation. 
 
But even then, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask ourselves, does the Premier 
enjoy the confidence of the legislature?  Earlier in the debate I read into 
the record . . . and I recall at the time with much objection from members 
opposite who objected to reading into the record the names of 
constituencies which encompassed border communities.  Interestingly enough, 
Mr. Speaker, when I read that into the record, the significant majority of 
those seats, those constituencies, are represented by Conservative members, 
the majority of whom, Mr. Speaker, are seeking re-election.  And as we are 
in the times that we're in, Mr. Speaker, we are in the eighth month of the 
fifth year of a four-year mandate for the PC government.  We are . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh no, here they go again, Mr. Speaker.  Now 
they stick up their five fingers.  Now they go stick up their five fingers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they might be trying to . . . Conservative members may 
be trying to convince themselves that when they were elected in 1986 they 
got a five-year mandate.  If they believe that, Mr. Speaker, they are the 
only people in Saskatchewan who do. 
 
There is a long and strong Saskatchewan tradition of four-year governments.  
People of Saskatchewan consider the governments to have a maximum of a 
four-year mandate.  So don't give me this foolishness; don't give me this 
foolishness of five-year mandate.  You can sit there and put up five 
fingers for all . . . you know, for all night if you want.  The fact of the 
matter is, Saskatchewan people don't believe you. 
 
Saskatchewan people . . . And if you were sensitive to the principles of 
democracy and to history of democracy in Saskatchewan, you'd recognize it's 
four-year mandates -- four-year mandates.  And the only exception to that, 
Mr. Speaker, the only time that that principle has been abused, Mr. 
Speaker, was in time of war, and an argument can be made that it was not 
abused, that it was extended.  But the consequences of that, when the 
election held after an extension over the five-year period, serious 
extension of the four-year tradition, Mr. Speaker, is that the government 



 

 

of the day was turfed out almost entirely. 
 
Saskatchewan people have been very strong in considering the mandate of the 
government to be four years.  There have only been, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
two governments that have gone more than four years in the history of 
Saskatchewan.  One was turfed out in 1944 when Tommy Douglas was made 
premier of this province, and the other one, Mr. Speaker, was this current 
government which went four and a half years from 1982 to 1986. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, clearly Saskatchewan history says there's a four-year 
mandate.  So one has to ask, Mr. Speaker, when a government is in the 
eighth month of the fifth year of a four-year mandate, does it really enjoy 
the confidence of the legislature?  What is the will of the PC members?  
And here we come down to the voting intentions of individual PC members of 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
What in effect the Minister of Finance and the Premier is asking his 
members to do -- those who are seeking re-election -- he is asking his 
individual caucus members to come to this Assembly, in the eighth month of 
the fifth year, and to vote in favour of the largest single tax increase in 
the history of Saskatchewan; and then within weeks, if not days . . . 
within weeks, if not days to go back out to their constituents in a 
provincial election, which must happen by the Canadian constitution, and to 
ask for them to send them back in here. 
 
Well I say to this House, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, I'm not convinced that the Premier has the confidence of the 
legislature.  I'm not convinced that there's enough hari-kari mentality on 
the other side of the House.  And I think that there may very well be 
several members on the other side of the House . . . Maybe they won't have 
the courage to vote against this tax and to vote with their constituents, 
but maybe they will find something convenient to do to be away from the 
Assembly when it comes time to vote, so that they are not on record as 
having voted for the single largest tax increase in the history of 
Saskatchewan in the 8th or 9th or 10th month of the fifth year of a 
four-year mandate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not convinced -- I am not convinced -- that this 
Assembly has the confidence of the . . . that this government has the 
confidence of the Assembly, as a matter of fact.  And so it puts into 
question, Mr. Speaker, for those who are required to collect the tax, the 
whole question about its legality.  Are they collecting a tax that will in 
fact come to be law or will the government respond, will the government 
respond as people have said by petition by the tens of thousands, Mr. 
Speaker?  Will the government respond by withdrawing the legislation and 
seeking a mandate in a new provincial election, which is what it ought to 
do? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I stand in this Assembly not at all convinced as I watch 
the members opposite -- and I watched their enthusiasm for this topic over 
the last two or three weeks -- I am not at all convinced that the Premier 
of our province enjoys the confidence of the legislature as he attempts to 
ram this tax down the throats of Saskatchewan people. 



 

 

 
Well sixthly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make the argument that the 
introduction of the provincial goods and services tax was part of the, what 
I call, despicable political agenda of the PC Party.  Mr. Speaker, I think 
recent history in the province has told us, as machiavellian as it may 
seem, and as irresponsible as it certainly is, that the PC Party, including 
the members here and the Premier, has seen it to be to their political 
advantage to drive a wedge between urban and rural Saskatchewan.  I think 
that's despicable.  I think it is totally unjustifiable. But unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is part of the agenda that's going on in 
Saskatchewan today and this tax is a significant part of that agenda. 
 
We saw some four years ago in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker . . . three and a 
half years ago in this Assembly we saw a Bill put through this House to 
gerrymander the constituency boundaries in Saskatchewan.  Members of the 
opposition referred to it as that, as a gerrymander at that time.  
Government members said no. 
 
Members of the opposition asked the government whether they thought it was 
constitutionally defensible.  The government said they thought it was.  
Members of the opposition asked why the government would not test that.  
Well when some people of Saskatchewan in fact did bring it through legal 
channels, the Minister of Justice referred that question to the 
Saskatchewan Court of Appeal which then earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, 
ruled and said by a five to nothing decision that, you've been caught 
cheating on the boundaries, the constituency boundaries of Saskatchewan.  I 
think, Mr. Speaker, this was a step, the first step that the government 
took as part of a re-election agenda to drive a wedge between urban and 
rural Saskatchewan -- to gerrymander the constituency boundaries and hope 
that the voting patterns of 1986 would repeat themselves, and try to assure 
themselves re-election, if that were to be the case. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, I think the government opposite said, what we've got 
to do if we have any hope at all of being re-elected is to drive a big 
wedge between urban and rural Saskatchewan.  We've got to get rural . . . 
We've got to manipulate rural Saskatchewan into saying that their only hope 
for survival is to vote PC in the next provincial election. 
 
(1930) 
 
It hurts me to say this, Mr. Speaker, because this is not politics as it 
should ought to be done, but I think this is the fact of the matter.  Mr. 
Speaker, while the member from . . . Well, I won't comment, Mr. Speaker.  I 
won't give any more credit to the member's comment than it deserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think as well then, leading up to the introduction of the 
announcement of this tax, we saw a political agenda which included some 
involvement in negotiations of the GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and 
NISA (net income stabilization account) programs which are now in place -- 
interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, with substantially higher per capita 
contributions from Saskatchewan than anywhere else, any other province in 
the country.  This says to me that the negotiations from our province in 
arriving at these federal programs to provide some hope and security for 



 

 

Saskatchewan farmers, the negotiations here were on the hurry-up.  It was 
more important to get a conclusion than it was to get a fair requirement 
for commitment, financial commitment, from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as a matter of fact we saw, Mr. Speaker, then the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture and others from the government opposite, trotting around 
Saskatchewan, speaking to large numbers of rural Saskatchewan people, 
almost all farmers, who took a great deal of interest in the GRIP and NISA 
proposals because for them they were talking about survival in future. 
 
I think the government made a tactical error, Mr. Speaker.  They thought 
that large attendance at these meant large support for the PC Party, where 
as a matter of fact what it meant is a large amount of interest in the very 
survival of the family farm in Saskatchewan. 
 
So they said, Mr. Speaker, what we have to do to drive that wedge between 
rural and urban Saskatchewan is, somehow we've got to try and make 
Saskatchewan people believe -- this is not true, by the way, but part of 
their agenda -- they say, we've got to try and make Saskatchewan rural 
people believe that their only hope for the security programs is to vote 
PC. 
 
And so what they said, Mr. Speaker, what they said . . . I found it 
interesting, when introducing this tax -- not in the Assembly but in a news 
conference on February 20 -- they said, here's a tax that's going to pay 
for GRIP and NISA, they said. 
 
Now the reality, Mr. Speaker -- we all know this -- when people pay the PST 
it doesn't come into government coffers and go into a little envelope 
marked GRIP and NISA.  I mean is anybody that nai pïve?  When people pay 
the PST and it comes into the Government of Saskatchewan, it goes into the 
Consolidate Fund, into the bank account so to speak, Mr. Speaker, to be 
spent on whatever government spends its money on.  It doesn't come in and 
go into an envelope marked for GRIP and NISA.  How nai pïve, how 
simple-minded they are. 
 
So what they want to do though, Mr. Speaker, wanted to do was to have 
people not give a whole lot of thought to this and simply to take them at 
their word.  And it was for that reason, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they 
decided to introduce this tax, not in the Assembly where it could be 
debated and questioned and documents would have to be provided, but to 
introduce it in such a way that the opposition could ask no questions and 
no one could demand that documents be provided to see their analysis of the 
tax, and in fact the budget, as is normally the case. 
 
It's for good reason that the Minister of Finance decided to introduce this 
tax in Saskatchewan in the closet of his own office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as much as I hate to say it, I think this tax was introduced 
to try and drive a wedge between rural and urban people; to try and force 
rural people to think that somehow if they didn't vote PC that somehow 
those people in the city who are paying the new tax wouldn't approve, and 
they wouldn't get the GRIP and NISA.  I think that's what their agenda was 



 

 

about. 
 
And they wanted it to happen quickly, Mr. Speaker, because they didn't want 
people to begin to understand what was going on here and that, in fact, the 
tax is just as damaging out in rural Saskatchewan as it is in urban.  
Everybody's got to pay.  What they were betting on, Mr. Speaker, was that 
people wouldn't have time to think about this because the more you think 
about it, the more despicable it becomes. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, and just to further make my case:  after 
this tax was announced and prior to March 23, Mr. Speaker, on about 
February 27 -- the tax was announced on February 20 -- on about February 
27, as I recall, Mr. Speaker, they held another news conference and the 
Deputy Premier was announced to be the person in charge of what they called 
Fair Share Saskatchewan, their fancy name, nice sounding name for the 
process of decentralization -- a principle which, Mr. Speaker, in itself 
makes some sense, with a lot of thought and a lot of planning, when you're 
expanding or introducing new programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, decentralization was introduced to drive more wedges between 
rural and urban Saskatchewan -- part of a despicable political agenda, not 
only, Mr. Speaker, to drive wedges between rural and urban Saskatchewan . . 
. Because what they would like to say and have people believe in rural 
Saskatchewan is that somehow they can gain if people in the city of Regina 
lose.  Never mind the fact that it cost some 25 or $30,000 a job to move -- 
never mind that; ignore that fact please, they say. 
 
But as part of that agenda, Mr. Speaker, it was intended, as well, to drive 
wedges between rural communities, community to community.  We're talking 
the politics of division.  That's what's going on in the province of 
Saskatchewan today.  And very clearly when they said that people could bid 
. . . I recall, Mr. Speaker, hearing them use the word "bid."  People could 
bid for government jobs they said.  Bid!  And in fact some did, some 
communities actually bid. They offered money for government jobs to come to 
their communities. 
 
But the real message, Mr. Speaker, here, is that people in rural 
Saskatchewan were supposed to bid at the ballot box -- supposed to bid at 
the ballot in the election that was supposed to be coming March 23.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it didn't turn out that way.  It didn't turn out that way 
because about March 6, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal said, you know 
those constituency boundaries you gerrymandered -- not constitutional.  You 
can't have an election on those boundaries. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the whole machiavellian political strategy to drive 
wedges between urban and rural Saskatchewan came crumbling down -- 
decentralization, PST, all part of the whole scheme -- all intended, Mr. 
Speaker, to be put in place without ever having any debate in this 
Legislative Assembly.  And all intended to be done very quickly before 
people could begin to really realize and to think through what was going 
on. 
 
All the members opposite seem to be a little sensitive about this, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, and I understand that.  I understand that, believe me, 
particularly when I see which members are being sensitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we come to a time now in which people have had a 
chance to understand.  Kind of interesting, just with the approach being 
taken to decentralization this week, the assessment being given by the 
public.  I bring to the attention of the Assembly an article written by 
political columnist Dale Eisler, in the Leader-Post on May 28, entitled, 
"It's a cruel way to treat people."  And what did he have to say, Mr. 
Speaker, about this government's mechanism for administering its 
decentralization program?  These are not pretty things we're talking about 
and I wish we weren't, but unfortunately this is part, I believe, of their 
political agenda, political strategy.  Mr. Eisler said this, and I quote: 
 

 To make matters worse, anyone with even a cursory understanding of 
politics in this province knows this decentralization is driven by the 
Tories' re-election agenda. 

 
Let me just repeat that, Mr. Speaker, and underline it.  This is what 
Saskatchewan's provincial political columnist says about their agenda: 
 

 . . . anyone with even a cursory understanding of politics in this 
province knows this decentralization is driven by the Tories' re-election 
agenda.  It is yet another attempt by the Tories to do whatever they can 
to consolidate their support in rural areas.  (And) if that means 
uprooting people and re-settling them in rural areas before an election, 
then so be it. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's an assessment; that's an assessment by the 
political analyst in the province of Saskatchewan.  It's kind of 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that if this is such a wonderful, grand plan 
that's been thought about and thought through so well, why it is that it's 
taken them into the seventh month of the fifth year of their four-year 
mandate of their second term to come up with this idea, introduced within 
seven days of their introduction of the PST outside this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I don't think in this Assembly we can ignore the fact 
that seven days apart, seven days apart, this government introduced the 
PST, announced the PST outside the Assembly, and then announced their 
decentralization agenda.  I don't think it's coincidence that they were 
that close, Mr. Speaker.  These were clearly part of a despicable, a 
despicable political agenda of the PC Party, one for which there is no 
excuse and I say that it is in all likelihood the people of Saskatchewan 
will reject in spades come the next provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would not surprise me that in response to their political 
agenda, which has resulted in their form of decentralization, which has 
resulted in the introduction of the PST, that the people of Saskatchewan 
would reject this PC government, similarly to the last time they rejected a 
PC government, for the next 50 years. 
 
Well seventh, Mr. Speaker, and this won't take long because I've made some 



 

 

reference to it before, I'm of the view, and I am opposed to the PC 
government's introduction of the provincial goods and services tax, on the 
grounds that they have no mandate.  I won't repeat the argument that I've 
already made, that here we are in the eighth month of the fifth year of a 
four-year mandate.  We've described that already. 
 
But let me refer to the other form of achieving a mandate.  There are two 
ways of getting a mandate in this province.  One is to govern responsibly 
for four years after an election.  That's one way of operating with a 
mandate.  The other way of achieving a mandate, Mr. Speaker, for those 
things that you can foresee and are part of your political plan, is to tell 
people at election time what you intend to do.  And if you're elected, and 
if you're elected . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Wonderful. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Oh, well the member says wonderful, and I agree, it is 
wonderful.  It is a wonderful way of doing it.  It is the way it was done 
in this province up till 1982. 
 
Let me just refer then, Mr. Speaker, to some commitments made, political 
commitments made, to Saskatchewan people at election time, and specifically 
to do with the sales tax.  Does he get a mandate by operating in the normal 
course of government in the first four years or by delivering on the 
commitments that you made at election time?  That's the way you get a 
mandate in a democracy, Mr. Speaker.  This is not odd. 
 
What's been the record of this PC government with regard to promises that 
it's made, promises that it's made at election time?  Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a PC government which promised in 1982 that it was going to introduce 
income tax by 10 per cent, or going to reduce income tax by 10 per cent 
they said.  Did they reduce it?  No.  In fact they increased it by 
introducing a 2 per cent flat tax which has the net effect of increasing it 
from some 50 or 51 per cent up to, in many cases, 65 per cent and more, 
effective as a percentage of federal income tax. 
 
They said they'd get rid of the gas tax, Mr. Speaker.  Well they did for a 
while.  Then they brought it back and then they gave it back to people and 
then they kept half of it and now it's all back, only more.  They took off 
a 29 cent a gallon tax and we now have a 45 cent a gallon gas tax from the 
PC government.  That's reduction in reverse.  I think they'd call that, 
using PC bureaucratese, Mr. Speaker, I think they call that an inverse 
increase, or inverse reduction.  That's what it would be -- an inverse 
reduction. 
 
(1945) 
 
But the point I want to make to this, in bringing their commitment to this 
particular debate, Mr. Speaker, is this: we have here a PC government which 
was elected under a promise -- get this -- under a promise to eliminate, 
not reduce but to eliminate, the sales tax they said.  If elected, if 
elected, they said we will get rid of the sales tax. 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Part of it? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- No.  My colleague says part of it?  No, no, no.  They made 
this crystal clear.  They marched around Saskatchewan and they said, we'll 
get rid of the gas tax and we're going to drop that income tax and elect us 
and we will get rid completely of the sales tax from Saskatchewan.  That's 
what they said -- all of it completely gone. 
 
That's their mandate.  That's their mandate because that's what they 
committed to the people of Saskatchewan at election time.  And the people 
of Saskatchewan said: you have a mandate in 1982, Mr. Speaker.  They said, 
you have a mandate; they elected them as government.  And democratically, 
they had a mandate -- they did.  They had a four-year mandate and it took 
them four and a half years to work on it.  And they had a mandate to 
eliminate the sales tax which is what they said in the election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what is this Bill all about?  Have they eliminated the 
sales tax?  Is this the Bill, Bill 61, to carry out the mandate to do for 
the people of Saskatchewan what they promised them at election time?  Is 
Bill 61 to get rid of the sales tax from Saskatchewan?  Not on your life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to take that argument and turn it up the other way.  
This is a commitment in Bill 61 not to get rid of the sales tax, not to 
reduce the sales tax, not to even keep the 5 per cent sales tax that they 
inherited, not even to keep the 7 per cent sales tax that they raised from 
5 per cent to 7 per cent -- in spite of having said that they were going to 
get rid of it completely -- Mr. Speaker, in this Bill 61 they are saying:  
no, we are not going to do what we told you at election time.  We are not 
going to get rid of the sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Bill they are saying, we are going to triple it -- 
triple it.  Triple it!  That is the financial implication of this tax as 
compared to the tax that was being collected by the 5 per cent sales tax; 
the 5 per cent sales tax that was in place when they promised to eliminate 
the sales tax. 
 
When we go back and check the numbers, Mr. Speaker, Bill 61 says not that 
they will get rid of the sales tax, it says that they will triple the sales 
tax in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say in this Legislative Assembly that is not a mandate.  It 
is not a mandate when you have committed yourself at election time to get 
rid of something and then you come along to introduce a Bill which will 
triple the revenues from sales tax that existed when you made that 
commitment. 
 
How in the world there is even a single member of that government opposite 
who can believe that there is the threat of honesty in their message to the 
people of Saskatchewan through the introduction of Bill 61, I don't 
understand.  Because they are saying in Bill 61, we are not getting rid of 
the sales tax we promised to get rid of at election time, we're tripling 
it. 
 



 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, they have no mandate.  There is a way of getting a 
mandate; it's called an election. And they have an obligation to call one 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well finally, Mr. Speaker, my eighth point.  I am of the view 
that this tax cannot be passed.  And perhaps in many ways this is the most 
important of all.  I am of the view that this tax cannot be passed, simply 
put, because people can't afford it. 
 
I found it kind of interesting when we broke for supper.  I went out to 
grab a sandwich, Mr. Speaker, and I don't know if the two people who were 
behind the counter were watching the proceedings on the television this 
afternoon. I don't know.  I didn't introduce myself; I just ordered my 
sandwich.  And as I went to pay it, one person behind the counter said, 
you've got to stop them on that tax; we can't take it.  And the woman that 
was assisting turned, Mr. Speaker, and almost with a sense of despair on 
her face said, don't they know that we can't take it?  Don't they know that 
we can't take it? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What was the name of the place? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- You know, Mr. Speaker . . . They ask what the name of the 
place was, and I'll tell them when we're off the record here, Mr. Speaker, 
because this is not a government which has a track record of dealing very 
fairly with people who express opposition to them, as we have seen in the 
news lately.  So, Mr. Speaker, I will tell the member privately after, but 
I'm not going to put it on the record, if he will give me his word that 
it's in confidence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I bring this to the Assembly not to say that this is the only 
time I've heard this, but simply to say, Mr. Speaker, this is the most 
recent time I've heard this. 
 
As has been my practice since being elected, I've attempted -- and I did 
again this year, Mr. Speaker, before coming to the Assembly -- to take a 
few days to knock on doors in my constituency.  Mr. Speaker, as I went 
through my constituency in Moose Jaw North, to listen to people and to ask 
them what their concerns were before we began this legislative session, Mr. 
Speaker, there was no . . . In fact I would say, Mr. Speaker, if I put all 
the other topics and concerns together, they didn't total the number of 
expressions of concern and despair that I had expressed to me about the 
provincial government, the PC government's proposed goods and services tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we're experiencing in our country . . . I think we're 
on the verge, in our country, of a tax revolt, largely because of the 
introduction of the federal goods and services tax.  And in many ways, Mr. 
Speaker, as I've talked to my constituents, the feeling I get is this:  
these are tough times; Tory times are tough times.  It's been said often 
and unfortunately it's true.  Our economy is in a recession, employment is 
insecure, young people are having a hard time finding jobs and when they 
do, so often it's at minimum wage, a minimum wage which moves so much 



 

 

slower than inflation, and often even that, part-time work only.  That's 
the reality.  And along comes the PC government in Ottawa to introduce a 
goods and services tax.  In many ways, Mr. Speaker, that was the straw that 
broke the camel's back. 
 
Brian Mulroney, he was willing to send eight brand-new senators -- to use a 
little wrinkle in the Canadian Constitution -- eight brand-new senators, 
including Eric Berntson, the retired member of this legislature, who is the 
campaign manager for the provincial PC Party . . . he sent Eric Berntson 
and others down to Ottawa, to the Senate, to ram through the goods and 
services tax there.  But you had to at least give Mulroney credit, you had 
to at least give the Prime Minister credit for this point.  At least he had 
the decency, Mr. Speaker, to say that the tax has got to be passed before 
we start collecting it.  Now he was willing to ram through eight brand-new 
senators by a never before used little wrinkle in the Canadian Constitution 
to do it.  He was prepared to go to extremes to do it, but at least he had 
the decency to do that, at least we can say that about him. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, what have we got?  We got the highest single tax 
increase in the history of Saskatchewan introduced at a news conference, 
and then coming to the floor of this Legislative Assembly three weeks after 
it's been started to be collected. 
 
People in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as I talk to my constituents and as I 
go anywhere in this province, they're saying to me, we can't take it any 
more; we're taxed out.  Saskatchewan people are taxed out.  And I say to 
this Assembly and I say to the Premier and I say to the Minister of 
Finance, Moose Jaw people are taxed out.  And I don't believe that they are 
any different from people in Tuxford or Watson or La Ronge or Saskatoon or 
North Battleford or Moosomin.  They're taxed out. 
 
And if there is something that we must understand in this place, we come 
here elected democratically to represent the will of our people.  
Government should be nothing more than the instrument of the will of the 
people to achieve what they want in their society.  Surely that's what we 
do in this place.  And Saskatchewan people are saying they're taxed out; 
they can't take it any more. 
 
But that may be a message that some in this Assembly don't want to hear.  I 
can understand that.  And oftentimes we will have in our hearts in this 
Assembly, the desire to do good for Saskatchewan and the costs of money to 
provide programs and services. 
 
But in 1991 in Saskatchewan, the people in our province are taxed out.  I 
don't think it has to be that way.  I've talked earlier in my address about 
ways that spending can be cut and other ways that revenues can be 
increased.  Some of that can't happen overnight.  I understand that.  But 
surely it must be our responsibility in this place to say that we must live 
within our means. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I opened the budget document for this year after it 
finally came to this Legislative Assembly, it said, this year the 
Government of Saskatchewan is going to receive in revenues over four and a 



 

 

half billion dollars -- over four and a half billion dollars; over $4,500 
per person in the province.  This is a brief side, Mr. Speaker.  It's also 
alarming.  But what that budget also said is that we've got an accumulated 
deficit -- every penny, in fact every penny plus $139 million accumulated 
under the nine, long, lean years of this Tory administration.  Nine, long, 
lean years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This province, this government has managed to drive . . . in nine years has 
managed to drive this province deeper in debt than it collects in a year.  
These are the best minds -- the best business minds -- of that brilliant PC 
Party.  These are the guys who are running the ship.  The ship is running 
aground, Mr. Speaker.  It's running aground. 
 
And so I simply say, Mr. Speaker, it may not be nice, it may not be a 
pleasant task, but I believe those of us in this Assembly are charged with 
the responsibility of saying if $4.5 billion is all that we got this year, 
if you don't have the guts to get a little more revenue from your natural 
resources; if you don't have the initiative and you don't have the courage 
and you don't have the insight and you don't have the fortitude and you 
don't have the plan to begin to diversify and expand an economy where more 
people are working and paying into the revenue through income tax because 
they're working and making money; if you don't have the ability to do that, 
then call it quits. 
 
Shut 'er down.  Call an election. The people of Saskatchewan are saying 
it's time for an election.  You're out of ideas. You're intellectually 
bankrupt and you're bankrupting the province.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I 
simply say -- as difficult as it may be -- the members in this Assembly are 
going to have to learn to live within our means and to make priority 
decisions to live within our means.  And if four and a half billion dollars 
is all that's coming in, Mr. Speaker, then that is all that can be spent.  
We cannot reach deeper into the pockets of Saskatchewan people.  It's not 
there to get. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I conclude -- I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying 
simply this.  After having outlined to this Assembly my objection to Bill 
61, a Bill to introduce in Saskatchewan the single biggest tax grab in the 
history of the province, the PST; objecting because I believe the GST is 
unnecessary; objecting because I believe the PST is unfair; objecting 
because I believe the PST is counter-productive; objecting because I 
believe it is ill-conceived; and objecting because I believe it is legally 
questionable; objecting, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that the PST is 
part of a despicable political agenda by the PC government to drive wedges 
between urban and rural Saskatchewan; objecting because I believe they have 
no mandate to introduce this tax; and objecting because I believe that 
Saskatchewan people and constituents of Moose Jaw North simply cannot 
afford this tax, Mr. Speaker, I conclude by saying that when it comes to a 
vote -- if it comes to a vote -- if this government has the courage to 
bring this to a vote, I will be voting with my constituents.  I will be 
voting for tax fairness.  I will be voting for positive economic and 
employment climate in Saskatchewan.  I will be voting for jobs, and I will 
be voting for the future of Saskatchewan's border communities.  Mr. 
Speaker, I will be voting for Saskatchewan and against Bill 61. 



 

 

 
(2000) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 
opportunity to speak in this debate especially after having to sit here for 
a couple of three hours and listen to the loose jaw from Moose Jaw carry 
on.  It would seem that no matter what we put forward in this Assembly the 
opposition is simply against it.  No matter what it is, they're against it. 
 
We've heard the member go on and on about past history, about what was; 
taking a look at trying to draw this tax Bill into political contributions.  
All the muck-raking that's possible for a member opposite to do, he engaged 
in.  It's standard NDP (New Democratic Party) policy, standard NDP tactics, 
because they're long on rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, long on rhetoric, and very, 
very, very, very short on planning.  They have no plan except to oppose.  
They are the ideal opposition party -- the ideal opposition party.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, they're going to remain that way for many, many years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- They've had a lot of practice at it; they're going to 
have to get use to it.  Because, Mr. Speaker, while it may be the job of 
the opposition to make certain that the government is fulfilling on the 
Acts that we pass in this House and coming through with programs for 
people, it is the NDP's definition of opposition that they are simply to 
oppose everything no matter what it is, simply oppose it.  Obstructionism 
has become the order of the day in this House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to Bill 61, we saw how members opposite upon 
the introduction of this Bill said, we will never debate it in this House, 
we will never talk about it in this House, it will never come to a vote.  
We will use every ounce of energy, every trick, every dirty trick at our 
disposal, everything that we can do to stop it from coming into the floor 
of this Assembly. 
 
And it's taken over two weeks, Mr. Speaker, two agonizing, long weeks 
before the NDP finally relented and said, okay, I guess we'll talk about 
it.  And now tonight, Mr. Speaker, we have the member opposite saying that 
he hopes that when this vote comes on this Bill -- when the vote comes on 
this Bill; he's acknowledging that the vote will come -- that he expects 
members on this side of the House to run and hide and not be here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been here every day while the sorry exhibition from 
members opposite on obstructionism went on in this House, ready to work, 
ready to carry on the work of this Assembly, ready to put forward our 
arguments on behalf of the government on Bill 61. Every day we've been 
here.  Time and again opposition members adjourned the House while there 
was still lots of time to work.  And when we said, no we won't adjourn the 
House, they walked out and left the bells ringing. 
 
Blackmail, Mr. Speaker, blackmail.  And they were holding you, Mr. Speaker, 



 

 

ransom, hoping that you would have to rule on this.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
today I'm very, very happy to say . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  With all due respect I ask 
hon. members not to involve the Chair in debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize if I've involved the Chair 
in any way, shape, or form.  But we also know that in this Assembly that 
you cannot do indirectly that which you are not allowed to do directly.  
And, Mr. Speaker, the obstructionism that the opposition resorted to did in 
fact place an onerous burden upon this Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill 61 is what we're here to talk about.  And the 
question is, why do we need Bill 61?  Well, Mr. Speaker, if you took a look 
at the budget that the Minister of Finance put forward, he outlines why we 
need Bill 61, why we have to expand the education and health tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly hope that in the future members 
opposite would refer to this Act, or this Bill, as Bill 61, and to the Act 
that is being amended by Bill 61 as The Education and Health Tax Act, and 
not some variation that they've thought up of the GST, or the PST, or 
whatever they want to call it.  It's almost as bad as the member from Moose 
Jaw North talking about piratization.  Mr. Speaker, they certainly like to 
hear their own words.  They like to use plays on words.  They like to 
indulge in rhetoric.  And, Mr. Speaker, they never want to get directly to 
the issue. 
 
Well the issue, Mr. Speaker, is that Bill 61 provides the necessary 
arrangements to raise the funds that are needed to carry on the work of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Members opposite say, oh no, that's not true.  
They say, no, no, don't need this tax, can't do this.  And then somehow, 
somehow, Mr. Speaker, they say they're not going to allow it to pass. And 
at the same time they say, and we're in the eighth month of the fifth year 
of our mandate and we've only got four months left, and we shouldn't be 
introducing this tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't make any sense to me that they're opposing 
this tax because, Mr. Speaker, to my way of thinking, if they really 
thought this was such a bad tax and they thought that the voting public was 
really going to rebel against this, Mr. Speaker, they'd let us pass it.  
They'd let us pass it and then that supposed swell, that ground swell of 
opposition from the voting public, would come into play.  And in the next 
election, which does have to come, Mr. Speaker, we would be out of office 
and they would achieve their ends. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't make any sense to me that they have not allowed 
this Bill to be debated.  It makes no sense to me that they stand in their 
places and carry on long filibusters about the Bill and its passage.  To my 
way of thinking, Mr. Speaker, it makes no sense on their part to do this.  
They should simply let the Bill pass and then obviously the things that 
they are talking about would come to pass. 
 
Unless, unless, Mr. Speaker, unless they know in their hearts, they know in 



 

 

their hearts that the people of Saskatchewan understand that this Bill, 
this tax Bill, is a necessary item; unless they believe that people in 
Saskatchewan have come to the conclusion that you get what you pay for, and 
if you get something you have to pay for it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if they have come to believe that, they are on the verge 
of losing what they thought was a comfortable lead in the polls.  If they 
believe that the voting public understands why we have to introduce a tax 
measure, they've lost the only piece of ammunition they have left for any 
kind of an attack in an election at all.  Because when it comes to the 
other issues, those of diversification, they have no platform.  When it 
comes to agriculture, they have no platform, they have no plan, they have 
no idea.  It's merely: me too and just a little bit more.  Me too and just 
a little bit more. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have got a number of organizations and a number of 
individuals that support Bill 61 and its implementation.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
I'd just like to read the list of some of those to you.  A harmonized sales 
tax system, Mr. Speaker, is supported by the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business, the Society of Management Accountants, the Consumers' 
Association of Canada, Ipsco -- Ipsco, one of the major employers in the 
city of Regina think this is a good idea -- Regina Chamber of Commerce, 
Regina Home Builders' Association, Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  Garf Stevenson 
said that a harmonized tax may not be so bad, but of course he represents 
Sask Wheat Pool, which is a vertically integrated, multinational company 
now, albeit it started out as a co-op and it still operates as a co-op. 
 
But it is one of those companies that the member who just preceded me in 
speaking said was going to be one of our friends who is going to benefit 
greatly from this tax change.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm a member of the pool.  
I'm a pool member; I haul grain there.  And my company that I own 
partially, because I'm a member, is going to receive a benefit from this 
tax Bill.  Fair enough.  They should be able to provide me with better 
services.  I can live with that. 
 
But the member opposite -- I don't think he is a pool member.  I doubt that 
he is.  He likes to talk about being a member of this co-op and that co-op, 
but I don't think he's a member of the pool. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll continue.  The Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association 
-- they think this is not a bad thing to harmonize.  You know, there are a 
number of organizations, including the Saskatchewan taxpayers' association 
. . . they gave qualified support to it.  It didn't give total support to 
it because they said it would be fine to implement this harmonization if 
the money went to the right places, like the farm safety net, the farm 
Bill, like the farm Bill.  And that's where it's going, Mr. Speaker.  It's 
going to do that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the number of people that support 
this tax measure and you look at the arguments put forward by the member 
opposite, which were not arguments . . . he spoke for over two hours.  He 
spoke for over two hours and did not talk about reasons that he did not 
want this tax Bill to come in.  He went into ancient history.  He tried to 



 

 

draw in every bit of slander and muck that he could find at his disposal 
and put it forward in this Assembly in the worst possible light. But he did 
not deal with the issues because they have no plan -- no plan. 
 
Members opposite, when they're in one town, talk about the fact that, well 
we don't need this tax; we're going to fight it.  When they're in another 
town they say, well we might need this tax because we've got to help the 
farmers.  Now that depends on where they're at and what they're doing. 
 
It reminds me of yesterday, Mr. Speaker, when we were looking at a 
decentralization announcement that occurred.  And that too will provide 
significant benefits to rural Saskatchewan and provide a better tax base 
for rural Saskatchewan.  I was in Wynyard, and the member for Quill Lakes 
stood up when he was questioned as to what the NDP government would do if 
they were elected, with regard to decentralization, and he said, oh we'd 
continue it. It's a good thing for this community, it's a good thing for 
this area, and I support it whole-heartedly. And I've got him on tape. 
 
Then I found that their other members in the city of Regina were saying, 
it's a terrible thing, it's a terrible thing; it's awful, and we would 
never stand for it.  Now, Mr. Speaker, the member for Humboldt, an NDP 
member for Humboldt, made the same comments about the decentralization move 
of Agriculture into Humboldt.  Again he said it was a good idea and he was 
in favour of it.  It was going to be a good thing for Humboldt. 
 
And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, just to go back to the member for 
Quill Lakes at Wynyard, he said that the NDP were the ones who started 
decentralization years ago anyway, and we were really just carrying on what 
they had started.  And wasn't it a wonderful thing that he was such a 
wonderful MLA because three of the projects were in his constituency.  Well 
I pointed out to him that it had a lot more to do with geography than his 
particular performance, but he was trying to take some credit for it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what I'm trying to point out to you is that the NDP say one thing in 
one town and one thing in another. 
 
Well let's see what the member opposite talked about.  Where did the money 
go, he said? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where did it go? 
 
 DHon. Mr. Petersen: -- Where did it go, the member wants to know?  Well 
I'm glad you asked that question, because I just happen to have a little 
list as to where the money went and why we need to bring Bill 61 into place 
in order to keep up the type of funding for the programming in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Where did the money go?  Well to agriculture.  You'd agree with me that 
money went to agriculture, would you not?  Well how much?  Well 78.5 into 
counselling assistance; 107 million to the farm purchase program; 14.1 
million to the feed grain adjustment program; 203.8 million to the feeder 
association loan guarantee program; 12 million to the livestock facility 



 

 

tax credits; 43.7 million to the livestock investment tax credit program; 
900,000 to the Save our Soils program, a very good program, Mr. Speaker; 
58.5 million through the farmers' oil royalty program, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, that was the program that allowed some of the royalties the 
province collected to be funnelled directly back into the agriculture 
sector in the form of a rebate program. 
 
Twenty-three point six million through the grasshopper control program.  
We're very, very interested, Mr. Speaker, in pests in agriculture today, 
and we'll make sure that we don't have one more pest to keep bothering us 
in the future just after the next election; 8.3 million in irrigation 
assistance; 2 million to the livestock moving program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we had a drought in the province, we said, fine -- we'll 
move the cattle to places in the province where there is feed, abundant 
feed, and we'll help the farmers move those animals.  And we did -- to the 
tune of $2 million. 
 
(2015) 
 
Sixty-three point four million to the 1985 livestock drought assistance 
program.  Again, 54.9 million to the 1985 . . . pardon me, crop drought 
assistance program.  So, Mr. Speaker, what I'm saying, in just a few of 
these things, is that the money went to purposes in agriculture that were 
needed, Mr. Speaker, definitely needed.  And most of it had to do with 
drought. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let's see what else we might have in agriculture.  Well 
let's see.  There was a provincial stabilization program -- 244 million 
went through the provincial stabilization program.  Isn't that interesting, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Thirty-five million to the Saskatchewan water supply program; 90.8 million 
to the provincial contributions through crop insurance; 67.9 million to the 
production loan interest subsidies, Mr. Speaker, trying to provide farmers 
with a rate of interest that they could live with when they badly needed 
cash they could not get from financial institutions. 
 
And that just brings me back to the difference between members on this side 
of the House and on that side of the House.  When the now Leader of the 
Opposition was asked back in 1981, when interest rates were 21 and 22 per 
cent, we've got to do something about agriculture, sir; can't you do 
something? He said: I'm sorry, that's not a provincial responsibility -- 
tough luck. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that was the appropriate response, and in 
1982 the farmers, the people of the province of Saskatchewan, didn't think 
so either because it not only was in agriculture but in the housing 
industry as well where people were suffering, and the members opposite did 
nothing; they did nothing.  And they paid the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've also had 442 million through the agriculture development 
fund -- 442 million.  Looking towards tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, looking 



 

 

forward -- agriculture colleges, Mr. Speaker; work on diversification 
projects in agriculture; work on projects that allow us to process the 
products that we have here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and to provide the 
jobs for our children that we need. 
 
Under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, they couldn't get the stuff out of the province 
fast enough.  The quicker, the better.  They didn't want people to be 
diversified, Mr. Speaker.  They wanted us to grow wheat for ever.  Just 
load it in the train and away it would go and it would take care of itself 
and they would be the saviours of whatever had to happen in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well so much for agriculture.  Where did the money go?  To economic 
diversification, Mr. Speaker.  Let's see -- 235.4 million in equity funding 
for the Co-op heavy oil upgrader in Regina.  Let me read that again.  It 
can't be true, Mr. Speaker, because the member opposite who just spoke 
ahead of me said, we don't care about co-ops.  Let's see; 235.4 million in 
equity funding for the Co-op heavy oil upgrader in Regina, that they didn't 
have the guts to build; that they didn't have the ability to foresee, to 
envisage, because they have no vision.  They don't look forward; they look 
backward.  Their vision, Mr. Speaker, is limited to say the least. 
 
And I guess I'll just back that up by going back to some quotes about where 
the money went and where.  We were trying to figure out where the money 
went after we took office in 1982, and we were trying to find out how come 
there was unfunded liabilities in teachers' superannuation funds and all 
the rest of it. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, the quote from the member from Regina Centre, the 
quote from the member from Regina Centre . . . And you've got to remember 
at the time that this was going on, the member for Regina Centre was the 
chairman of the Public Accounts Committee.  That's the committee, Mr. 
Speaker, that we opened up to the public for the first time of course, when 
we took office. 
 
Now here's what the quote is, and it goes back directly to what I mentioned 
earlier here about the NDP not having any vision.  And what happened was a 
former colleague of ours, Mr. Katzman, who was the member for Rosthern at 
the time, uncovered a hidden deficit, the unfunded liabilities, and he was 
questioning those things in the proceedings of Public Accounts Committee. 
 
And I quote the member from Regina Centre when he was questioned about 
that.  And he said: 
 

 This is a lesson on how not to set up a pension plan.  This is an apt 
lesson on how not to set up a pension plan.  The difficulties with pension 
plans are that we politicians tend to live for the moment.  Our time 
horizons are normally next month, sometimes next year but never beyond the 
next election. 

 
And that is a direct quote from Hansard, Mr. Speaker, from Public Accounts, 
from the member of Regina Centre, the member from Regina Centre.  Ned 
Shillington said those words, Mr. Speaker.  The member for Regina Centre 



 

 

said those words in Public . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order. Order.  The hon. member, I know 
in the course of enthusiasm, made a slip and mentioned another member's 
name.  I just wish to bring it to his attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  I got carried away 
briefly. 
 
Well it's no wonder that the opposition doesn't have a plan to offer the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Their time horizon is a month from 
now, to say the very least, and usually it's hindsight, 100 per cent. 
 
But the member for Regina Centre said some other things that day, and well 
I think I should read those into the records as well.  And he went on to 
say, and the member whose name I won't use, but the member for Regina 
Centre said further in those proceedings: 
 

 The problems with these things is that it's a very long-run problem.  You 
can do something today which is not terribly responsible, and you are not 
going to pick up the tab for many years to come. (You are not going to 
pick up the tab for many years to come.)  That's why the idea of having 
pensions negotiated between employees and the government of the day . . . 
is not a wise one because the problems come back to haunt you so far in 
the future and we politicians aren't always cognizant of what's going to 
happen in the next decade.  We have this terrible fear that it may be our 
worst enemies who have to face the problem in 10 years time. Therefore, 
why worry about it? 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously for members opposite, the government, the PC 
government is their worst enemy.  And you're right, Mr. Minister from 
Regina Centre, the time has come when we have to face your irresponsibility 
to the tune of billions of dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- So why do we need Bill 61? Well we not only need it 
to fund agriculture that's had some extremely difficult times . . . And I'm 
going to go on and read where the money went some more, Mr. Speaker, but I 
just thought I'd stop briefly there and also point out to the viewing 
audience and to people in this Assembly that we have to pay for the 
mismanagement of the NDP as long ago as 10 and 15 years.  So that's why we 
have to put the tax in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where did the money go? Well, let's see.  We've got a number of places in 
diversification -- $222 million for the Lloydminster heavy oil upgrader.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, not only did we provide 235.4 million for the upgrader 
in Regina, we found 222 million for the Lloydminster heavy oil upgrader.  
Half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker; half a billion dollars that we put 
into economic diversification for projects that had not previously existed, 
that provide hundreds and thousands of jobs in the construction period and 
will provide hundreds of jobs for years to come. 
 



 

 

The NDP idea of diversification is to buy potash mines that already exist.  
And if we're talking about mandates, I can go back to the debates in this 
House and I don't recall in 1972 ever hearing any of the NDP candidates 
wandering around saying that they were going to set up a land bank or that 
they were going to set up a proposal to nationalize the potash mines.  So 
if you want a case of the pot calling the kettle black, we have one right 
there. 
 
Well let's see, we've had over 20 million in tourism development project 
grants, Mr. Speaker.  Tourism. Tourism.  It is the one thing that we've had 
overlooked in this province since time immemorial.  It took this 
government, Mr. Speaker, to get Saskatchewan on some of the maps of world 
tour guide companies or world tour packages. 
 
The NDP didn't want anyone to know about Saskatchewan.  They believe that 
if they could keep this inside the boundaries of Saskatchewan, they'd have 
their own private fiefdom, their own socialist utopia.  And if nobody from 
the outside world came in here and talked to us, none of us would know any 
different and we would all think we were happy for ever. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we've tried to bring people in, not only to invest in 
this province but also to participate in much of the natural beauty of this 
province, as well as the history and the heritage of this province, Mr. 
Speaker.  And we've been quite successful, and I'll leave it up to the 
Minister of Tourism when he gets up to speak in this Bill to go back into 
the last several years that we've been in office, and to show you how that 
$20 million investment has paid off time after time after time in jobs and 
diversification, Mr. Speaker, and in taxes coming into our province.  And 
I'm sure he'll be getting into this debate in the not too distant future. 
 
Well let's see, I could read off a list of several hundreds of millions 
more dollars we've put into diversification and not just, Mr. Speaker, not 
just with companies that are deemed by the opposition to be Tory friends.  
I doubt, Mr. Speaker, that there are members opposite who would stand up 
and say that all of the businesses that we've been involved with and that 
we've worked with are all Tory friends because if they are, Mr. Speaker, we 
certainly don't have anything to worry about for the next election, if we 
have all those friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care.  Where did the money go?  Health care.  Well 
since 1982, Mr. Speaker, we have committed and we have spent on behalf of 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 9.2 billion -- billion -- in 
health care.  That's a lot of money.  In Saskatchewan, 9.2 billion is a lot 
of money in health care.  Now of course if you're in the province of 
Ontario that's just kind of one year's deficit under an NDP administration, 
but we're trying to stop that kind of thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We're trying to hold the line in places and we have.  We have trimmed 
things back, Mr. Speaker.  We have curtailed programs.  We have trimmed off 
any excess fat that we could possibly find.  Mr. Speaker, we've done it in 
the fifth year of our mandate of our second term and we've done it because 
we have to be responsible, Mr. Speaker.  You have to be responsible. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just briefly comment to the members chirping from 
the opposite side about eighth month and seventh month and all the rest of 
it and third trimester and you name it, about the government and our 
system.  Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite spent too much 
time in Nicaragua, Ecuador, and other countries, minding their business in 
those countries instead of learning about the political system in this 
country.  Mr. Speaker, the political system in this country provides for a 
five-year mandate.  Read it; it's in the books.  It doesn't imply a 
four-year mandate or a three-year mandate or a mandate of 4 months and 72 
seconds, it says five years. 
 
(2030) 
 
We are not in the United States of America, although there are some members 
opposite who would be more acquainted with that system than this one, but 
they chose not to stick around in that country and exercise their franchise 
there.  They came here instead and they didn't bother to learn that we have 
a five-year mandate here -- five years, five years.  We are a different 
system than the Americans -- we are a different system -- just so you 
understand it.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to fulfil our duty and our 
obligation as a government during the five years of that mandate. 
 
And our duty and our obligation, Mr. Speaker, is to the people of this 
province and to future generations.  And when we travel and we talk and we 
consult with the public, as the Minister of Finance and others of us have 
done, we heard people saying, you have to get the deficit under control.  
Spend where you need to, spend where it makes sense; cut where you have to, 
trim where you can, but you have to control the deficit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for a government to be in the fifth year of its mandate 
and to introduce a tax increase, a broadening of the base of the E&H 
(education and health) tax as we have done, has been called suicidal.  It 
is not the normal thing for a government to do.  It is not the normal 
practice, especially not of the NDP, to be responsible.  They can't 
understand why we're doing it.  Mr. Speaker, when you look at the expansion 
of the education and health tax that we have put in place, you will see 
that it makes eminent sense. 
 
A thousand years ago, Mr. Speaker, we had taxes.  You gave so many sheep to 
the lord, so many men to the king, and that was a form of taxation.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, over the years property taxes held on as a traditional way of 
raising revenue.  1917 came along in this country and somebody said, boy, 
we got to raise some money to fight the First World War.  Income tax was 
introduced as a temporary measure.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was a 
designation of a particular group of people who could pay tax. 
 
It was arbitrarily deemed, originally in ancient days, that if you had 
property and if you wanted to hold that property, you could and you should 
pay a tax.  1917, it was deemed that if you had income you should be 
helping to pay for a war at that time.  To fight a war, you should be 
paying your share. And it was deemed that if you had income, you should be 
paying tax on that income. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we saw further was in our tax structure, just briefly, 
varying groups throughout the years were deemed to be able to pay tax.  
Property holders, as the original one went, were deemed to be able to pay 
tax.  Then income earners were deemed to be able to pay tax and then they 
went to various sectors. 
 
Okay, we've all heard about the sin taxes that we have -- alcohol, tobacco 
taxes -- and those taxes, Mr. Speaker, were put on arbitrarily as luxury 
taxes.  The theory was if you could afford the luxury and you want it, 
you'll be prepared to pay some tax for it.  And if you can afford to buy 
the luxury you can afford to pay the tax. 
 
Businesses, Mr. Speaker, especially under the NDP, were deemed to be able 
to pay taxes.  The oil industry, the resource sector, was deemed to be able 
to pay taxes.  Now, Mr. Speaker, they took varying forms -- royalties, 
taxes, tax increases, surtaxes.  And, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP you were 
also deemed to be able to pay taxes if you died -- an inheritance tax. 
 
So let's see.  We've got everything from property owners to income earners 
to corpses paying taxes under the NDP, right through.  They believed that 
you could take a particular sector and say, yes, that sector shall pay tax.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we've found is that while that may have been 
entirely true at the inception of those taxes, it does not hold true today. 
 
Varying economic changes have seen to it that property owners may not be 
able to indeed pay taxes.  If you are a farmer in the province of 
Saskatchewan and your cash flow has dropped off because of drought and/or 
tough economic times caused by world prices for grain, although you may 
hold several quarters of land in your title, in your name, you may not be 
as readily able to pay taxes on that property as you once could when you 
had a reasonable cash flow. 
 
The same thing holds true for other businesses.  The machine implement 
dealer, for example, Mr. Speaker, will pay anywhere between 10 and $15,000 
in taxes if they're in a small town in Saskatchewan. Whereas, Mr. Speaker, 
someone who is in another type of profession, let's say, oh, accounting -- 
it doesn't take a lot of property to be an accountant.  You need an office, 
you need equipment, you need staff, but not a lot of property.  May not 
have a lot of property tax to pay, but may end up with the same or better 
take-home income than that implement dealer.  So property taxes have been 
viewed for years as becoming more and more unfair. 
 
Income, let's take a look at income as a source of taxation.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the truth is in our society today we have an increasing number of 
seniors who are generally out of the work-force, and we have a group of 
people who are not employed, who pay very little taxes, if no tax at all as 
a matter of fact.  And as has been pointed out a number of times, there is 
a narrowing band of people who are actually paying taxes to support the 
functions that people in society demand in general.  That group of people 
who are able to pay income tax is narrower and narrower. 
 
And members' opposition will say, well that's fine we can tax the rich -- 
and maybe there are tax loopholes that some people take advantage of.  But 



 

 

the truth is, Mr. Speaker, that the rich comprise an extremely small 
portion, an extremely small portion of society.  And fair enough, let's tax 
them, let's tax them a little more.  Let's make it a progressive tax.  But 
they have to face the fact that on income tax a narrower and narrower band 
of people are in that taxable area. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you've done that, you've looked at that and you've 
looked at the vagaries in the industries of agriculture and machine 
dealerships and so on and so forth, property taxes no longer fill the bill, 
income taxes no longer fill the bill, death taxes . . . well, we won't talk 
about those.  The NDP talk about bringing them back; I'm not too sure.  
Members opposite say they won't bring back the death tax, but that's fair 
enough -- we'll let them tell us what their plan is if they have one.  You 
have nowhere to go, Mr. Speaker, except to a broader base of taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we are experiencing extremely low grain prices 
because of world price wars -- subsidy wars, Mr. Speaker, caused by 
countries like the European Economic Community are made up of, who have a 
value added tax, Mr. Speaker.  And a value added tax is similar to our GST, 
similar to our education and health tax, except it's at about 30 per cent. 
 
Now what it has done in the European Economic Community, Mr. Speaker, it 
has allowed the governments involved in that community to have a large 
enough source of revenue so that they can actually challenge our entire 
grain industry in Canada -- and especially the province of Saskatchewan -- 
by subsidizing us to death.  And they do it by utilizing a value added tax 
on everything. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it stands to reason that if all these other sectors I've 
mentioned are having greater and greater difficulty in raising tax dollars 
or being seen as being capable of paying taxes, or of some form of 
taxation, and we look at the European Economic Community where everybody 
pays a certain amount of tax, right through the piece, and they are able to 
cripple our agricultural economy by utilizing the power of that kind of a 
tax, Mr. Speaker, it makes some sense to me that we should look at the 
advisability of entertaining our own type of value added tax, or what have 
you, in our own country so that we can have the wherewithal to fight those 
subsidy wars. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is what we have done in Saskatchewan.  The federal 
government implemented the GST.  We said fine, we think you could do it 
simpler, we think that there are other things that you could do, but if you 
insist that this is what you plan on having, if you think that the European 
model is a reasonable one, so be it.  Let's make it simple.  If we're going 
to have a GST and we're going to have a provincial sales tax, let's 
harmonize it. 
 
And the member for Regina Centre . . . Again, I'm sorry to pick on you 
tonight, but it's just you've been so . . . provided such a wealth of 
comments that I have to use you because, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina 
Centre was a spokesman for the NDP with regard to tax issues when the GST 
was implemented.  And he said the province of Saskatchewan should 
harmonize.  He said it should harmonize. 



 

 

 
Of course that was last week or last month or last year.  This week or this 
month or this year, harmonization is a bad thing because the NDP have seen 
that indeed people of Saskatchewan accept it as a measure that makes some 
sense.  And the NDP are saying, holy cow, we don't have anything else to 
fight on; let's keep this one stirred up as long as we can and maybe, just 
maybe we can put the old scare tactics out there to people and maybe we can 
trick them.  Maybe we can trick them. 
 
Maybe we can tell them that as the NDP, should they become government, 
maybe the NDP won't put in a harmonized sales tax.  They don't tell you how 
they're going to raise the money except through the old adage about waste 
and mismanagement. 
 
They're going to do away with government advertising or information 
services, which provide information to people of Saskatchewan on the 
programming that we have, positive programming.  Not advertising for our 
family of Crown corporations or anything like that, but instead, solid 
information as to how people can apply for varied programs, what the 
programs mean, what it costs, so on and so forth. 
 
They plan to shut down about 80 per cent of the province's small-town 
newspapers that rely upon that type of advertising as part of their 
revenue.  But they don't think about that because, I don't know . . . I 
don't know and I don't believe that they ever go outside these hallowed 
halls, or certainly not outside of Regina, because if they did then the 
members for Regina would not be disagreeing with the members for Quill 
Lakes and Humboldt on decentralization as they have. 
 
Those members said decentralization is good.  Members in Regina say it's 
bad.  The old flip-flop: say one thing out there and the other thing in 
here. 
 
So what I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, is if they ever went outside of Regina, 
they would see that people understand why you have to come through with 
some tough, hard measures.  They don't want their grandchildren and their 
great-grandchildren to bear the debt that we create in the future.  They 
want their grandchildren and their great-grandchildren to have a province 
that is at least capable of paying its own way, at least capable of 
managing its deficit -- 12 cents out of every tax dollar today, Mr. 
Speaker, goes to service the debt in the province of Saskatchewan.  Isn't 
that enough?  Haven't we moved through some difficult times?  Haven't we 
provided billions of dollars of help for agriculture?  We held on, Mr. 
Speaker, in agriculture until we could put the farm safety net into place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, all that remains is for us to pay our provincial share of 
that farm safety net program and farmers will have a program in place that 
they pay for, the province helps to pay for, the federal government shares 
in, and they will have the insurance that they have longed for for so long.  
They will have the insurance they need to continue farming.  All the farm 
families in the province of Saskatchewan want and need that security, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



 

 

And through Bill 61, by raising those extra tax dollars, we will be able to 
meet the provincial commitment for our share of that program.  And I can't 
see that as being a bad thing, Mr. Speaker.  Because our share of the 
program, about $126 million provincially, will generate $1.3 billion back 
into the hands of farmers in this province.  And when farmers have money, 
small business has money, everybody has money, the province does well 
economically.  When people have money, when business is booming, you have 
tax dollars generated. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it will come back to the province down the road.  But 
members opposite don't understand the concept of having to put seed in the 
ground in order to get a crop a little further down through the year.  They 
can't see that concept. 
 
They don't understand the concept of feeding a cow for a year in order to 
have a calf and to be able to get milk from that cow.  They'd just as soon 
shoot the cow now and have a big feast and enjoy it, and let somebody else 
worry about tomorrow.  That's what they believe.  And that's what they've 
done.  And that's what members have said they've done.  The member for 
Regina Centre admitted it. 
 
Time and again, Mr. Speaker, we see this short-sightedness; time and again 
we saw this short-sightedness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2045) 
 
The members opposite tonight in their speeches said exactly that same 
thing.  They have no plan, no plan for the future.  The most that the 
member who spoke ahead of me could say was that there's been waste and 
mismanagement and it's a terrible thing, and if they had been government it 
would not have occurred. 
 
He talked about patronage, Mr. Speaker.  He talked about patronage loud and 
long.  He had himself an excellent little few moments there on one of his 
five or six points, whatever they were, talking about patronage. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about patronage, you know, you could 
take a look at that member himself, that member himself, Mr. Speaker.  
Let's take a look at some of the interesting people that have been placed 
on a payroll when the NDP were government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let's see.  We have EAs (executive assistant) to . . . Well I guess I can't 
use the member's name, but anyhow he was an EA to the former . . . well to 
a Speaker of the Assembly.  The name is Doug Archer.  How about that?  How 
about that?  I believe he's the mayor of Regina now. 
 
Then we have the member for Saskatoon who was an investigator in the 
Rentalsman's office.  She was the former NDP vice-president.  And Roy 
Atkinson should be proud of his daughter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's see what else we might find here in my interesting, 
interesting little . . . Well look at that.  The NDP member for Moose Jaw 
North, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, he, from the Department of Education in 



 

 

the year 1981 and the spring of 1982, received an honorarium for $5,700.  
The member for Moose Jaw North, who just got up in his place and called 
down the PC government for patronage, got a payment of $5,700 in  
 Done shot -- and we don't know what he did.  An honorarium?  An 
honorarium?  Mr. Speaker, I'm not talking about a loan.  I'm not talking 
about a loan.  I'm not talking about a loan, Mr. Speaker; I'm talking about 
an honorarium. 
 
But you know what I really find interesting, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, 
I really find it interesting that that's how little they thought of them.  
It was only $5,700. 
 
Then we get into, Mr. Speaker, the illustrious list of Koskies.  Now, Mr. 
Speaker, the illustrious list of Koskies -- and I have a couple of pages 
worth, Mr. Speaker -- have been maligned enough in this House.  It's bad 
enough that they have to be related to the member for Quill Lakes without 
having me go through their names in this House as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we could just take a look at a number of things.  The 
member for Regina Centre, too, shared in the largess of the NDP government.  
After he was a defeated NDP candidate, he became an EA to the attorney 
general, October 22, 1971.  Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- The current topic under discussion . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Does the member . . . Order, order.  Order.  Does 
the member have a point of order? 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker.  I'm wondering what the 
present subject under discussion . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the Minister of Finance to 
allow the member from Saskatoon Sutherland to put his point of order. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm wondering what the present topic of 
discussion by the Minister of Highways has to do with the Bill under 
consideration -- Bill 61, the provincial PST. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- The point of order is not well taken.  The member 
from Moose Jaw opened this part of the debate up in his remarks, so I think 
the minister has the right to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And yes, indeed, I would not 
have gone into this had the member from Moose Jaw North not brought this 
topic up in his comments.  But while we're at it, Mr. Speaker, and getting 
back to honorariums, the now critic . . . the Health critic, the Health 
critic who was nominated . . . or sought the nomination for the NDP in 
Regina North West in 1979, received $7,100.04 from the attorney general's 
department as an honorarium in 1981, spring of 1982. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those kinds of things, you know, that I find in my notes 



 

 

here lead me to sort of wonder how the member from Moose Jaw North could 
stand up in this House, and with a straight face, talk about patronage and 
waste and mismanagement in a PC government when their own government when 
they were in office were 10 times worse.  Blatant.  Okay, I relent, maybe 
they were only seven times worse. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on and on and on again, defeated CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) MLA; defeated NDP MLA; defeated MPs (Member of 
Parliament) time and again here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, waste and mismanagement, patronage -- I think I've proved 
to you, Mr. Speaker, tonight that the NDP were masters of that art, masters 
of that art, and we are left to pay the bill today.  We are left to pay the 
bill. 
 
And when we talk about Bill 61, harmonizing our tax situation, trying to 
make sure that we have a balanced budget, we don't say we'll balance it 
this year.  We can't. We admit it.  But we do say, yes we made a darn good 
shot at it.  Yes we've done some tough things.  And again I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not normally the case of a government in its fourth or 
fifth year of its mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite go on about the eighth month of the fifth 
year, or whatever.  I believe a member wishes your attention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask leave of the Assembly to 
introduce some of our visitors in the gallery. 
 
Leave is granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just sitting here, Mr. 
Speaker, I drove up to the legislature a short while ago and noticed a 
group of young people out front and out back of the legislature. And a 
number of them are wearing very colourful sweat-shirts -- Right to life, 
and I love life.  And basically I would assume, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
have a group of young pro-life people in the gallery.  And I would ask all 
members to heartily join with me in welcoming them to our legislature this 
evening. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm certainly glad to see that 
there are people who do take an interest in the proceedings of this House 



 

 

and I compliment our guests on their stand.  It takes a lot of courage to 
stand up for what you believe in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is one thing that I have tried to continue with through 
my entire comments, is that the NDP do not stand for anything.  They will 
say one thing when it makes political sense to them in Regina and another 
thing when it makes political sense to them in Prince Albert.  One thing 
when they're asked about the Saferco project in Moose Jaw, and in the 
Assembly and in Regina they say it's a bad thing.  One thing in Regina when 
they're talking about the Fair Share Saskatchewan program and another thing 
when they're out in the Quill Lakes and in the Humboldt constituencies 
about the Fair Share Saskatchewan.  And totally opposing views, Mr. Speaker 
-- blatantly opposite. 
 
I don't know how they can justify their stand, Mr. Speaker.  Time and again 
on Bill 61 we have seen flip-flops back and forth.  The member for Regina 
Centre said we have to harmonize, we have to harmonize.  The member now 
stands and says harmonization is a bad thing.  The Leader of the Opposition 
turns around and says, well we're not going to be able to support this tax 
measure; it's going to be a tough thing to do and we aren't going to tax 
people.  And then in another place and another time he says, we're going to 
tax the oil companies, we're going to tax those big bad resource companies, 
the vertically integrated multinationals.  Mr. Speaker, that is the type of 
hypocrisy that the opposition have engaged in. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, while it might be tough and it might be hard to do, and 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, we are laying our political future on the line when we 
make some tough decisions, I believe they are the right decisions.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, just like those young people that joined us tonight in the 
gallery, we put our position out where people can see it and we don't 
change it from place to place.  We maintain our plan, we maintain the same 
type of theme throughout all of our programs. 
 
The Premier does not dodge; he does not flip-flop; he does not hide.  He 
stands up; he says what he believes, Mr. Speaker.  I believe that we have 
laid a plan out to the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  The 
Minister of Finance did that in his budget speech and we will pass this tax 
and we will be judged accordingly, Mr. Speaker.  I will be supporting Bill 
61. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
make a few remarks with respect to this Bill, the Bill which government has 
introduced to introduce a tax, extend a tax, a sales tax of 7 per cent to 
children's clothing, to yard goods, to books, to restaurant food, to the 
residential electricity and to residential natural gas, and virtually all 
services after January 1, 1990, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say at the outset that I am unequivocally opposed to this 
tax.  I believe that it is wrong in principle, Mr. Speaker.  I believe that 
this tax will bring economic ruin to the province of Saskatchewan, and 
furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan want 



 

 

this tax repealed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I go in with the arguments that I wanted to talk about 
on this, I want to just pay my compliments to the member who spoke previous 
to me about this, the member from Kelsey-Tisdale.  I would say with all of 
the arguments that the member gave, he did in general talk about the need 
and his belief in the tax.  In fact, he gave a very . . . during his 
remarks he gave a very compelling, a very compelling argument for an 
election. 
 
He said he wants the tax, and he is going to vote with the government to 
insist that this tax goes in.  By doing so, Mr. Speaker, he is clearly 
against the wishes of 80 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan.  He is 
paying no attention to the negative economic impact that this tax will have 
on the province of Saskatchewan.  He is paying no attention to the loss of 
jobs that this tax will have on Saskatchewan, and he is paying no attention 
to the unfairness of this particular tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think he has given us a good reason, a good argument for having an 
election, because if he and other members on that side refuse to back down 
on this tax, it appears the only answer will be for the people of 
Saskatchewan to come through with an election and kick these people out.  
That way we'll be able to get rid of this unfair tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, at least the member had the courage to 
get up and defend the tax, even though I don't believe his arguments made 
much sense.  But, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I don't expect the Premier 
to get up here and argue and defend this tax.  I really don't.  I think 
that the Premier will expect the Minister of Finance to get quite a few 
members, back-benchers, to come up and try to defend this tax, but I don't 
think that he, himself, will be exposed in this thing. 
 
I don't think he's got the courage to do it.  I think the Premier is going 
to stay and he'll hide because he knows what people are saying.  He knows 
what people are saying about him.  People are saying that there's no 
difference between this Premier and premier Vander Zalm, got kicked out in 
British Columbia in the type of government that he's run, the waste and the 
mismanagement in the governments, and the scandals. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, there is a question that people are asking.  They are 
asking, what is the difference between this Premier and premier Vander 
Zalm, the former premier Vander Zalm of British Columbia?  And the answer 
to that question people are expecting is, the difference is only five 
months, Mr. Speaker, five months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- That is how cynical people have gotten about politics, 
about politicians over the last four to five years since the governing of 
this province and of this country by PC governments, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

(2100) 
 
I return now, Mr. Speaker, to dealing with the issue at hand, and that is 
the issue regarding the tax.  I say it's time, Mr. Speaker, to restore 
faith in politics in this province.  And one way to restore faith in 
politics and the job of politicians and the job the politicians have in 
doing the best they can with the money that they are given, is to stop this 
tax, because people feel that they are being overtaxed.  And people are 
giving us these signals with petitions.  They are giving these signals with 
letters, with letters to the editor, with phone calls to MLA offices. 
 
And the public are saying in all of these petitions and in the letters and 
in letters to the editor and in their phone calls, they are saying that 
instead of ramming this PST through, what the government should be doing 
first is correct this wasteful spending and examine other sources of 
revenue that they've got at hand that they are not using. 
 
They are asking, Mr. Speaker, where has all the money gone that this 
government has already got?  They are asking, isn't $4.5 billion enough 
revenue for a province of less than a million people?  They are saying, Mr. 
Speaker, it's time the government opened its books before you tax us some 
more.  It's time. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, that my leader has given a commitment that one of 
the first acts of the government, should a New Democratic government be 
elected in this coming election, is that we will open the books, Mr. 
Speaker.  We will open the books to show the government record, see where 
money has been wasted on privatization, see what has happened and how the 
monstrous debt has been accumulated, and just how much is still owed that 
might not be showing at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that this tax, this 7 per cent PST, is a Bill that we 
are receiving from this government after nine years of waste and 
mismanagement; nine years of continued preaching from the mountain top; 
nine years of lost services; nine years of taxes going up, property taxes 
going up, income taxes going up, gas taxes going up, the flat tax, the 
lottery tax, the used-car tax and now the PST -- broken promises I might 
indicate; nine years of increased deficits; nine years of privatization.  
This tax is being imposed after nine years of falling bond ratings; nine 
years of increasing business bankruptcies.  This tax is being implemented 
after last four or five years of population drain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is because while this government has been in power we've 
seen increased taxation, decreased services, increased debt, loss of farm 
families, loss of population, that people are wondering, what's going on? 
Is there no limit?  Is there no limit to the amount they're going to tax?  
Because people know that this government's revenue, during their term of 
office, far exceeded inflation.  And they also know that this government's 
spending exceeded its revenue.  And they're saying, surely you should be 
able to do with $4.5 billion for a population of 1 million. 
 
I say to this government, you should pull this tax, you should change this 
tax, you should listen to the people of Saskatchewan.  It won't necessarily 



 

 

save your political hide but at least it will save the province -- at least 
it will save the province. 
 
In my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the question, 
whether or not there is a need for a new tax or is there other ways.  I 
want to relate evidence about the economic impact that this tax will have 
on Saskatchewan.  I want to relate that this tax represents a broken 
promise to the people of Saskatchewan.  I want to compare this tax to other 
tax increases that this government has brought to the people of 
Saskatchewan.  I want to show something of public response to this tax.  I 
want to talk about the concept of fair taxation, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 
talk about this government's record of taxation and increased deficits and 
the sad state of the economy of the province that this government has led 
us to.  And last of all I want to make a comment of the social impact of 
this tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, is there a need for a new tax?  Is there really a 
need to a new tax?  Let us keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
has increased its revenues year by year by year.  Now we're at $4.5 billion 
of revenue.  People say, well, if you've increased taxes that much and if 
you've had these Crown corporations and the government has been talking 
about and has been actively selling all this time, where has all the money 
gone?  Where has the money gone?  Well where has the money gone? Because we 
shouldn't have to increase the tax. 
 
They're defending the tax because they need the money.  I say they don't 
need more money because there are places here that we can identify readily 
that has clearly been . . . money has clearly been wasted; some due to 
carelessness and a lot due to mismanagement.  Some people may be more harsh 
than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at some of the cities that the minister, the 
Premier, the Hon. Premier and the other members of the government of the 
cabinet . . . and I have a page here that has well over a hundred places 
where the premiers have travelled.  And I'll just read a few of the places. 
 
I wonder why we had to have cabinet members going to Reno, Nevada; or 
Phoenix, Arizona; or Port of Spain or New Orleans.  I wonder why we had to 
have plane trips to Palm Springs in California or Thailand or Honolulu. 
 
Now I'm just reading a few of these, Mr. Speaker.  There's a whole page but 
I've just chosen six or seven. 
 
I wonder why we had to have government members, cabinet ministers and their 
entourage travel to Rio de Janeiro or to Paris or to Vienna or to Singapore 
or to Brazil or to Tokyo or to Moscow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask the question: as a result of all this world travelling, 
what have we benefitted in Saskatchewan?  Have we benefitted from some kind 
of an inflow of immigration?  Has any inflow of investment come as a result 
of it?  What has been the net effect?  If the net effect had of been yes, 
then the deficit would not be where it is, Mr. Speaker; the deficit would 
not be where it is.  It would certainly would have been quite a bit 



 

 

different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look through some of the other sources of waste and 
mismanagement for which this government has to bear the responsibility and 
for which this government is now asking the people of Saskatchewan to pay 
an additional tax, presumably so they can carry on in the same fashion that 
they have in the last nine years, one of the things that really sticks in 
the craw of the people of Saskatchewan is the fact that they've decided to 
pay the president of PCS, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, a salary 
of $740,000 a year. 
 
That is a very symbolic, very symbolic thing, Mr. Speaker.  It's symbolic 
because it represents the kind of money that they're willing to pay their 
friends, those that are close, while at the same time not caring about what 
happens to the wages of the poor, or those on minimum wage, or the general 
population of Saskatchewan.  There are some people who have done well.  But 
the middle income group in Saskatchewan and the lower income group have not 
done well by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are other things, Mr. Speaker.  The member that spoke before me 
referred to patronage.  I'll look at the same thing.  Mr. Speaker, this 
government has come up with a new art form when it came to patronage.  Let 
me mention just a couple.  These names which I will read off, I wonder if 
anybody could identify for me where these names come from. 
 
There is one Graham Taylor who's now in Hong Kong.  There is now a Bob 
Andrew.  There's a Paul Rousseau, a Larry Birkbeck, a Paul Schoenhals, 
Gordon Dirks.  There's a Sid Dutchak.  There's a Jack Sandberg, Keith 
Parker.  There's a Ralph Katzman -- his name was mentioned once before 
today.  There's a Louis Domotor, Tim Embury, Myles Morin, Bud Smith, and 
Gordon Currie.  And then there's one to top them off, Eric Berntson. 
 
Now what do you think all of these people might have in common?  Two 
things, Mr. Speaker, two things that they have in common.  They were all 
elected members of this government at one time or another. That's one 
thing.  And the second thing they have in common is that they have all 
received patronage appointments by this government.  And some of them at 
rather interesting salaries. 
 
Take Eric Berntson, for example.  Eric Berntson, when he was a member of 
this government, was receiving a cabinet salary.  When he resigned from 
this government, he received a severance pay of approximately, shall we say 
70, $80,000.  And at the same time when he went to the Senate, he got a 
raise in pay to the equivalent of what a Senator gets, which I would expect 
would be in the vicinity of 100,000, Mr. Speaker.  And then why did he go 
there?  Well we got the double whammy there, Mr. Speaker.  We have to pay 
him as a patronage appointment.  On top of that he's the one that they sent 
down there to push through the GST, the hated GST. 
 
I use as evidence of my remarks here and as a back-up to my remarks, an 
editorial from The Estevan Mercury, Mr. Speaker.  This was written in 
August 1990, and I will just quote a small portion of this if I may.  This 
is from The Estevan Mercury of August, 1990, and the title of the editorial 



 

 

is labelled "Patronage pain".  And I quote: 
 

 Patronage appointments escalated to a new high last week when a former 
Conservative MLA received an early Christmas present. 

 
And it goes on: 
 

 Larry Birkbeck of Moosomin received a 10-year appointment to the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board at a starting salary of $57,820. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess that's the problem, is we have these former 
ministers who while they're in government talk about private business and 
the virtues of private business -- which we all agree with to some extent 
-- but what do they end up doing?  They end up going on the public dole, 
Mr. Speaker, because they really cannot survive in the free market-place, 
Mr. Speaker; don't know how. 
 
A couple of other examples, Mr. Speaker.  In my home constituency there is 
an office on Central Avenue. It's called the Premier's office, Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier's office.  I don't know why the Premier needs an office in 
Prince Albert when he's got a member who has an office.  A member from 
Shell-Torch has an office in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker.  There are 
government offices, in Mac (McIntosh) Mall in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker.  
I don't know why the Premier has to have an office. But do you know how 
much that office in Prince Albert . . . He's got an office in Saskatoon; 
he's got two or three offices here in Regina, Mr. Speaker.  But in Prince 
Albert instead of going to the government-owned building, he decided that 
he had to spend a little more money -- another case of waste, 
mismanagement.  The annual lease for that Premier's office is $46,000, and 
that's before you hire anybody and put anybody in it, Mr. Speaker -- 
before. 
 
(2115) 
 
There are other examples, Mr. Speaker, of wasted money.  And the point I'm 
trying to make here, Mr. Speaker, all along, is this government is saying 
over and over again that they need this tax money.  They say they need this 
tax money and they ask people well, where would you get the money.   I say 
that that is the wrong question.  The question is not where would you get 
the money; it is where has the money been going? 
 
Look at your own books first.  Every one of us, every family in 
Saskatchewan, every farmer, every business has got to learn to live within 
his or her own means.  This government's got to learn to live within its 
means -- $4.5 billion ought to be enough.  There are other examples, many 
other examples, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don't want to go on with all of them, but I just want to mention a couple 
of other things.  Supercart, a loss of $212,000; GigaText, we know that $6 
million loss, part of it was to rent a luxury condominium in Regina for 
Pierre Paillet -- $137,000 gone; and part of it for his Mercedes-Benz -- 
$1,000 a month, Mr. Speaker.  Well the list goes on and on and on. 
 



 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the point here is that there is lots of money to be found 
where the government is right now, but they've got to look inward.  But 
they don't know how to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Oh, Mr. Speaker, where has all the money gone?  They did a lot of 
privatization, this government did.  They did a lot of privatization.  Did 
you know that they spent . . . that they paid $64,000 to a British merchant 
bank, N.M. Rothschild & Sons, for two months of privatization consulting?  
A lot of good that did the people of Saskatchewan.  They paid $26,000 to 
the PC Party's advertising company for advertising cost related to chamber 
of commerce conference, promoting free trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There's a continual debate, Mr. Speaker, as to the need . . . as to where a 
government . . . its money and where it should target its money and where 
it should perhaps get its money from. 
 
One of the arguments is that governments . . . or the cause of debt, 
national debt, are because the governments have got themselves involved in 
too many social programs.  And we hear that argument all the time.  I don't 
happen to subscribe to that, although I do say that there is a limit to the 
number of social programs you can or should have.  But on the other hand, 
there is the argument that one of the reasons that governments are in debt 
is because they are not taxing those people that they should be taxing. 
 
Well I want to quote from the Winnipeg Free Press from '91.  And this was a 
study done by Statistics Canada, a secret study that was done by Statistics 
Canada which was leaked to the Winnipeg Free Press.  The government would 
never admit to having this, but the Free Press reporters apparently got a 
hold of it and reported it in '91.  So I quote from this study, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

 The study, which StatsCan officials say exists but can't be made public, 
(You see the secrecy of the PCs; they are not allowed to make it public.) 
shows that 44 per cent of Canada's colossal, $400 billion, national debt 
is due to tax breaks for corporations and the wealthy. 

 
 Another 50 per cent is caused by the compounding growth of interest 

payments piled on interest payments and on those revenue shortfalls. 
 

Well the point they're making here, Mr. Speaker, is that the upkeep of 
education and health and social services is not the cause of increases of 
taxation and of the national debt, but the real cause is where they're 
letting the money drain out of the country that the national treasury 
should be getting a hold of. 
 
What's happened, Mr. Speaker, at the federal level . . . and this impacts 
on us here in the provincial level because one of the problems is that this 
government has given up considerable money in tax money, has given up tax 
money by not fighting the off-loading of the federal government.  They have 
let the government go ahead, the federal government go ahead with their 
off-loading on education and health.  And they are allowing the federal 
government, by providing rebates, allowing them to provide rebates to many 
corporations who have made millions, literally millions of dollars in 



 

 

profit.  And not a cent or a hearn of tax to the coffers of the Government 
of Canada or to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. I have a page with approximately 
15, 20 examples here, but I'll just read a couple.  There is a company 
called Ocelot Industries who had profits in 1988, of $432 million.  Now if 
you made profits of $432 million how much do you think you should pay in 
taxes?  Should the company be required to pay at least something in taxes?  
It would seem reasonable that anybody who makes $432 million in profits in 
a particular year should pay some taxes.  This particular company, Ocelot 
Industries, paid zero in taxes according to the record, according to the 
record.  This is no secret study.  This you can get from any place, any 
place in Revenue Canada.  It's readily available. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, during 1968 there were 60,000 corporations that paid 
absolutely no taxes.  Some of these companies have businesses here in 
Saskatchewan and should be paying some tax here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact some of these companies . . . here's one a lot of people are 
familiar with, Goodyear Canada.  Goodyear has operations throughout 
Saskatchewan. They do a good business.  They made profits in 1988, of 11 
million. But what did they get in taxes paid?  They paid zero taxes. But in 
addition to that, they got a tax credit of 1.4 million. 
 
Well this is the kind of operation that is run by Tory governments.  They 
are putting and raising taxes on consumers in Saskatchewan while at the 
same time allowing this kind of tax system to go on at the federal and 
provincial levels by not taxing those who have the ability to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about other ways of taxing, briefly, but I wanted to 
mention also a little bit about the internal workings of the government.  
When we asked them to open the books and to take a look at . . . we had 
good reason to do so, Mr. Speaker.  If we could force the government to 
take a good look at its own books things might be different.  And even if 
they allowed their own back-benchers or if their own back-benchers and 
their own cabinet ministers took some time and took a look at their own 
books, I think things would be different. 
 
Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker?  Why do I say that?  Because here we have, 
Mr. Speaker, several headlines.  There are headlines which appeared in all 
of the papers, all of the major papers across the province, probably in 
every paper, and this is headlines regarding the auditor.  The auditor, Mr. 
Speaker, is a person who was hired by the legislature.  The auditor is not 
to be hired by the government members or by the opposition members; he is 
hired by the legislature. 
 
His purpose, Mr. Speaker, is to take a look at the way money is being spent 
in the province and to give judgement.  Is the way the government is 
spending money, is it being done legally and is it being reported properly 
according to proper auditing rules? 
 
Well these headlines, Mr. Speaker, that we saw over the last couple of 
years read like this: Tory actions break the law, auditor says.  Here's 



 

 

another one, another headline, this is from the Regina Leader-Post:  
government not accountable, says the auditor.  Here's another one:  
Saskatchewan broke the law, the auditor says. 
 
What has happened, Mr. Speaker, is the auditor, when looking at the books, 
found that things were not in order -- found that they were not in order.  
And he was doing his job in doing so.  And I quote a couple of remarks that 
the auditor made in his report.  One of them says: with the appointment of 
more private sector auditors, the Provincial Auditor now sees about 50 per 
cent of the expenditures from the public purse.  And he says: I cannot 
effectively carry out my role to watch over the public purse for my client, 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Those are statements of the Provincial Auditor when he found out that the 
government was siphoning off part of the books and giving them to their own 
private auditor so that he could not access them and see whether the money 
was being properly spent.  Well it makes you really question why the 
government members want to do this.  If they really believed in public, 
open government, they would have made that readily available and they 
wouldn't be changing the rules and taking that money and those accounts and 
giving them to a private auditor. 
 
The auditor said: in my opinion, I have been interfered with in the 
execution of my duties.  Mr. Speaker, now they come up with a tax.  They 
come up with a tax and they expect people to say, yes, we'll give you the 
tax because they need more money.  Mr. Speaker, the question that has to be 
answered first is, where did the money go?  That has to be answered first.  
And surely 4.5 billion ought to be enough. 
 
Well we remember what happened when the auditor said that, Mr. Speaker.  
The government turned and attacked the messenger -- the auditor -- which 
was a rather unfortunate thing.  But, Mr. Speaker, the point being made 
here is that surely the government, before it adds a new tax which is quite 
likely going to kill the economy of Saskatchewan, they ought to be looking 
internally at where they can save first of all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the impact that this tax will have 
on the province of Saskatchewan, and what I believe the impact will be. 
 
The question to be asked then, Mr. Speaker, is, will this tax have a 
positive effect or will it have a negative effect on the Saskatchewan 
economy? And particularly, what effect will it have on job creation?  The 
second question that could be asked is, is this new tax fair?  Is it the 
kind of tax that should be implemented in Saskatchewan? 
 
But let's deal with the first one, the first question, and that is, what is 
its effect going to be on the Saskatchewan economy.  Well the government 
members have given arguments that this new provincial GST will create 5,000 
jobs over the long term.  They seem to be basing this on two arguments.  
The first argument that they're using is that because they impose this tax, 
somehow businesses will be relocating to Saskatchewan from other provinces.  
Now they base that on the argument that businesses will be getting an input 
tax credit, therefore they will not have to pay taxes on their inputs. 



 

 

 
There's a second argument that they're using, and that is that somehow is 
that the removal of the provincial business . . . provincial sales tax from 
their business inputs will lead to increased investment.  And of course, if 
you have increased investment, they say that's going to be job creation.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, I contend that those arguments are both false, based . . 
. They're complete bogus and have nothing to do with fact whatsoever.  As a 
matter of fact, if you look at their impact study -- and their impact study 
is available to anybody in the public that might want it and I'm prepared 
to supply them with a copy of the government impact study -- you can see 
how false, what false premisses these arguments are based on. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, there are really three 
categories, what could be called three categories of jobs, Mr. Speaker.  
There are jobs related to agriculture, there are jobs related to other 
primary industries and manufacturing, and then there are jobs related to 
what I will call the domestic economy, and that involves things like 
construction, transportation, communications, utilities, trade, finance, 
insurance and real estate, service such as restaurants, and public 
administration.  Well, Mr. Speaker, there were the three main sources of 
jobs in Saskatchewan.  If you look at each one independently, and try to 
examine how the tax will affect each one of these, you can get a pretty 
good idea of the economic impact of this particular tax. 
 
Let's look at agriculture first.  Now first of all, in Saskatchewan, the 
agriculture economy, agricultural sector, accounts for about 10 per cent of 
the gross domestic product of Saskatchewan and about 18 per cent of the 
total employment of the people of Saskatchewan.  Now we know that the 
agricultural sector is most heavily influenced by world prices; it's very 
heavily influenced by the exchange rate and by interest rates.  And this 
new provincial GST, because farmers had the tax credit from it and were 
already exempt from the provincial sales tax, will likely not have much 
effect one way or the other on the agricultural sector -- very little 
effect on it.  The only effect it will have will be on the agricultural . . 
. on consumption by people who live in the agricultural sector.  But the 
agricultural farm sector itself, that 18 per cent of the province will 
likely have very little affect.  So we can just put that out of the 
picture, whether there will be more employment in farming or less. 
 
But let's take a look at the other primary industries in manufacturing.  
This is the part of the economy that includes oil and gas and mining and 
forestry and fishing and trapping, and that accounts for about 7 per cent 
of our gross domestic product, or about 26,000 jobs all together in 
Saskatchewan -- about 6 per cent of our total employment.  Slight bit less 
than farming, about a third of that that isn't farming. 
 
Now, the claim is that the new provincial GST will create more jobs in this 
particular sector.  Now right now, if you take that sector and add it to 
the first one, Mr. Speaker, then you'll have a total of 38,000 jobs.  And 
they're claiming that it's going to increase this particular sector.  Well 
let's take a look at the record of this sector over the last 20 years. 



 

 

 
Everybody knows, Mr. Speaker, that in the manufacturing sector, that is in 
the oil, gas, mining, forestry, fishing, and trapping, that the number of 
jobs has steadily been decreasing.  As these industries become more and 
more capitalized, the number of jobs has been decreasing.  It is true that 
the output in manufacturing in Saskatchewan  
 Dhas been on a steady increase -- that is true -- that has happened over 
the last 20 years, but the number of jobs in that field has been steadily 
decreasing. 
 
Let me give you an example, a more specific example.  In forestry, for 
example, which is northern Saskatchewan and about half of it is out of our 
city of Prince Albert.  But if you take a look at the trend from 1979-80 to 
the year 1988 and '89, and count all the people that were employed in 
forestry, you'll see that the numbers decreased from 3,060 jobs in 1979-80 
to 2,423 jobs at the current time.  Why has this happened?  And this has 
happened, Mr. Speaker, even at a time when production in that field has 
gone up.  Production has gone up but our labour force has gone down by 
about a third.  My argument here, Mr. Speaker, is that there has been an 
uncoupling of . . . between the investment and production on one side in 
these industries and employment on the other side.  While production in 
these industries has gone up, employment has gone down because everything 
is becoming more and more mechanized. 
 
So clearly, Mr. Speaker, any time you invest money in this field, the 
record has been over the last 20 years, and I don't expect it to change, 
that if you put money into manufacturing, any of our primary industries, 
the result is not going to be more jobs, its going to more production and 
fewer jobs. 
 
So the argument that the government makes that somehow this is going to 
create more employment is absurd.  Their argument is absurd because this 
tax, if it benefits anybody, if it benefits any sector at all in the 
province, will benefit those sectors who have high input costs in term of 
machinery and equipment and supplies.  Those are the people that it'll 
benefit because they will be able to deduct, deduct those expenses from 
their . . . deduct those purchases from their income. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what this tax does and what their arguments say is exactly 
the . . . what this tax will do is exactly the opposite of what this 
government says it will do.  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Then the question comes, well is this a good argument 
then?  Is this a good way to help those large mega projects and those 
businesses, by giving them tax rebates on this proposed provincial GST?  Is 
it the best way to help these people? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is it that the province's largest corporation, some of 
our largest manufacturers, say helps them or hurts them the most?  One of 
our province's largest manufacturers, which is Ipsco, reported in '89 that 
in 1989 its export sales were curtailed because of the high exchange rate.  



 

 

The thing that hurt them most was not the tax they were being charged on 
their goods or on their inputs; it was their exchange rate.  It happened to 
be because of the dollar value. 
 
Clearly the government would have done much better if it was able to 
convince the federal government that the problem for Ipsco could be easily 
solved if the exchange rate -- that is the value of the Canadian dollar -- 
was decreased, and the money that they had to pay in interest would be 
decreased if they would have brought the interest rates down. 
 
The same kind of statement is made by the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan.  They reported that the changes in exchange rate between '88 
and '89 cost their company, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, by $13 
million.  They are not going to be saved by this PST, by being able to 
deduct the cost of this PST, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's clear, Mr. Speaker, that what has happened is that there has been 
uncoupling between the jobs created and the increase in input in the 
manufacturing sector.  So if the government was concerned about increasing 
jobs, they would not have imposed this tax -- they would not have imposed 
this tax.  They would have done something completely different, and they 
still can, Mr. Speaker.  They still have the opportunity to pull this tax; 
they still have an opportunity to amend it.  I don't know if they will, Mr. 
Speaker.  If they're smart they will, but if they don't, the people will 
have a choice and they will have that choice in the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about the domestic provincial economy 
and what the effect of this tax is going to be on the domestic provincial 
economy.  In a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, the effect on the provincial domestic 
economy is going to be one of disaster.  We have evidence of that already, 
Mr. Speaker -- companies going broke; restaurateurs coming to this 
legislature; business people coming to this legislature; working people 
coming to this legislature; car dealers, people that are concerned about 
the tax on reading coming to this legislature; people from around the 
borders, the west and the south borders of Saskatchewan, concerned about 
cross-border shopping, coming to this legislature pleading with this 
government to drop this foolhardy idea of this tax before it completely 
ruins the province of Saskatchewan and makes it the basket case of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at the provincial domestic economy.  This 
part of the economy accounts for about 77 per cent of our gross domestic 
product.  In it there are employed people to the number of 329,000 jobs -- 
about 73 per cent of our total provincial employment.  And I'm talking 
about the people in the domestic part of the economy -- people that are in 
construction, people that are in transportation, in the communication 
services and utilities; those who have small businesses around this 
province, the grocery stores and the confectioneries and the hairdressers; 
those that are into finance, those that sell insurance and real estate; 
those that are into the educational services and the social services and 
the health services; and those that are in public administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the sectors that are particularly susceptible to 
declines within the province in disposable income.  People in the retail 



 

 

services depend on the people of Saskatchewan having some money in their 
pockets to spend it domestically.  They're very dependent on consumer 
spending; they're very dependent on consumer confidence. 
 
Now we know right now that many businesses are being very hard hit by the 
combined effect of the federal GST and on top of that the provincial GST.  
They're just simply saying that 14 per cent of tax is too much. 
 
We know that there are other businesses as well, that is the credit unions 
and insurance agencies which will be adversely affected also by the 
provincial GST.  Even though they are themselves exempt from charging GST, 
they do have to pay GST on their inputs.  The only way they're going to be 
able to offset that is to increase their costs.  So the consumer once again 
will bear the price through the financial institutions. 
 
So what happens, Mr. Speaker, is this has been recognized by many people 
across Saskatchewan.  In fact the Saskatchewan section of the Alliance of 
Canadian Travel Associations has analysed the impact.  And they have said 
that, and I quote: the tourism in this province will suffer greatly as a 
result of the PST and that the end result would be lost jobs and ultimately 
lost revenue for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that side of this Assembly, the government side, somehow argues that by 
putting this tax on, they're going to create 5,000 jobs.  You know, it 
doesn't make any sense at all.  But I've had some people say, well gee, if 
a 7 per cent tax will create 5,000 jobs, why didn't they double it? They 
could have 10,000 jobs out of it.  It just shows, Mr. Speaker, that nobody, 
absolutely nobody believes him when they say that this tax is going to 
increase the number of jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let us concede that there may be a slight increase in the 
number of jobs in the manufacturing sector under the best of luck.  Under 
the best case scenario let's concede that there might be a half a per cent 
per year.  Let's see, there might be a half a per cent per year.  If you 
did that and you took a half a per cent per year, that would amount to 760 
jobs.  Nowhere near the 5,000 jobs, nowhere near the 5,000 -- it would come 
out to 760 job increase.  That's in that one sector that might benefit.  
But if you take that same half a per cent decrease over this domestic 
sector that I've talked about, this large portion of jobs of 329,000 jobs, 
this domestic portion, and you take one half of one per cent, that would 
mean a loss of . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, would the hon. member take a question 
relative to their study? 
 
Mr. Speaker: -- Would the hon. member take a question? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Can I have the floor, Mr. Speaker?  Thank you.  I would 
say, Mr. Speaker, that I will be very pleased to ask the minister questions 
during the third reading of this Bill, and he will be able to pass the 
question to me, and we'll have a good dialogue at that time.  But at this 
time I have a few remarks I want to make and I'd like to go on.  But I 
thank him for his interest. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, we are . . . I was saying that given the 
best case scenario there may be 760 jobs gained in the manufacturing 
sector, but if that holds true, there will also at the same time be a loss, 
a net loss, in the domestic sector, the service sector, of 8,225 jobs using 
the same analogy over that period. 
 
Now if you take a gain of 760 jobs and at the same time a loss of 8,225 
jobs, what have you got?  What you got happening to the province of 
Saskatchewan?  You got 7,500 jobs lost in the province of Saskatchewan.  
What's that going to do to the provincial economy?  What's that going to do 
to the provincial population, Mr. Speaker?  What's that going to do to the 
rest of us that are left to pay the taxes and the debt of this province?  
Mr. Speaker, this is a boneheaded tax.  It is absolutely boneheaded.  There 
is no economic argument that makes any sense whatsoever as a defence of 
this tax, Mr. Speaker, absolutely none. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that as a result of having this tax for . . . own in 
place and being charged only one month, that there has already been an 
effect which has been measured on consumer prices.  In fact, in April, the 
month that the first stage of this provincial tax was imposed, the consumer 
price index in Saskatoon rose by 1.3 per cent and in Regina by 1.4 per 
cent, in one month.  And that was at a time when across the nation in 
Canada, by contrast, the increase was zero.  So you might ask yourself, why 
did it increase in Saskatchewan?  What was going on different in 
Saskatchewan than any place else?  There is only one answer to it: the PST 
-- the PST.  What else was happening?  Why should it be that the consumer 
price index went up in Saskatoon and Regina by 1.3 and 1.5 per cent while 
the CPI (consumer price index) across the country was at zero? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was another precedent for the very same thing.  When 
this government broke its promise and increased its provincial sales tax in 
1987 from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, there was also at that time an increase 
in Saskatchewan consumer price index which was about twice the rate of 
increase in other parts of the country.  As a result of that, that year 
Saskatchewan's CPI, even though we were not in some kind of a great big 
boom in Saskatchewan in that year, 1987, our CPI increase was a full per 
cent over and above the national prevailing inflation rate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well they might argue, Mr. Speaker, that there will be some kind of an 
increase in some other sector.  I ask you what's going to happen to 
housing.  Will the amount of housing be going up or has it been increasing 
as a result of this new tax? 
 
What has happened is there has been some housing increase as a result of 
the lowering of the interest rate.  But there are many people that are 
feeling that as a result of this new tax -- and know full well when the tax 
is going to be applied in addition to materials that it will be applied to 
services to housing -- that this will have another detrimental affect on 



 

 

the cost of housing, which will keep a restraint on the number of housing 
increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about business bankruptcies?  What has happened to the 
number of business bankruptcies in Saskatchewan? 
 
I want to bring to the record, Mr. Speaker, that during the nine years of 
this government the number of business bankruptcies in this province has 
increased four times . . . has multiplied four times, by a factor of four.  
When they got into government the number of business bankruptcies were 162 
and at this stage last year the number of business bankruptcies increased 
to 616.  That's four times the number of business bankruptcies as there 
were some short nine years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this new provincial GST, what will it do to the number 
of business bankruptcies?  Because most of these retail businesses depend 
on consumers, and on consumer spending, and on consumer confidence which is 
being curtailed by this PST, there can only be one thing happen -- that 
this is going to put additional pressure on businesses and that's why there 
are so many businesses that are so opposed to this tax. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, many of the businesses, the retailers who 
traditionally tended to in the past vote for this government -- but 
probably won't any longer -- are in the leadership of opposing this tax.  
They're in the leadership of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me turn now to the last argument that I want to make about 
the economic impact of this tax, and that argument has to do with 
cross-border shopping.  Mr. Speaker, more and more people -- you know this, 
government knows this, opposition members know this, in particular our 
retail sector knows this -- more and more people are travelling across the 
Saskatchewan border to Alberta and to the United States of America.  More 
and more people are travelling across the border to shop.  And part of 
that, and a large part of that, is as a result of this PST. 
 
Here is a print-out from the Saskatoon . . . from the Leader-Post, Mr. 
Speaker, April 29, 1991.  And the statement here is that shoppers returning 
from spending sprees in the United States or the popular West Edmonton Mall 
are technically required to pay the tax on items that they bring home.  
Well technically they're required to, but why are they going there?  
They're going there for the reason that tax is just pricing the goods out 
of their reach. 
 
This same article says, Mr. Speaker, that increasing numbers of Canadians 
cross the U.S. border to take advantage of lower prices and to avoid the 
federal goods and service tax.  And I take it, Mr. Speaker, also that would 
apply to the provincial GST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government talks about a level playing field.  That was 
their slogan here for a year and a half -- they talked about a level 
playing field.  I ask you and I ask members of the government, if this tax 
puts the retailer in Saskatchewan on the level playing field?  The retailer 
in Saskatchewan has to charge an extra 7 per cent more than his counterpart 



 

 

in Alberta and 14 per cent more than his counterpart across the American 
border.  I ask this government if that's putting our retailers on a level 
playing field. 
 
It's a result of what they've done, that people are crossing the border.  
In fact here is an article written partly by Mark Wyatt and partly by Chris 
Varcoe in the Leader-Post. And they say this, and I take it that their 
research is valid.  They say that the number of people crossing the 10 
border entries in south-eastern Saskatchewan has risen by 38 per cent in 
the past two years, with 971,224 leaving the province during the past 12 
months ending in April.  That's a 38 per cent increase in cross-border 
travel over the last two years. 
 
Now I doubt very much if that's Americans coming up to Canada to shop 
because of the bargains and because of the new tax here.  And I think it 
has everything to do with the increase in taxation in the province of 
Saskatchewan and in the country, our national country in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cross-border shopping which was started as a result of 
the federal GST, which was sort of the precursor . . . and this government 
wants to harmonize with them, you see.  They want to harmonize with the 
feds.  I mean they think if they can get together with the feds, things 
will be all right.  In other words, if they can add their 7 per cent to the 
federal government's 7 per cent, boy, that'd be a great thing for 
Saskatchewan somehow. 
 
The Canadian Press has an article here where the title of the article says 
the anger over GST could break up Canada.  And this is a report on a survey 
which says almost half of Canadians surveyed last month -- this was written 
in April 17 -- surveyed last month cut personal spending because of the 
GST, spurring a warning from the business lobby last Tuesday that anger 
over the tax could help break up Canada. 
 
The question that was asked of these people in the survey was: how has your 
household reacted to the new 7 per cent GST?  And they found that 45 per 
cent of those surveyed cut their spending in response to the GST.  This was 
before the PST was even implemented. 
 
That's why I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, that the impact, the economic impact, 
of this tax, this 7 per cent PST, coupled on top of the 7 per cent federal 
GST, is a disaster for this province.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, what is known 
as one of Canada's national magazines, Maclean's, in their April 15, 1991 
edition, wrote a major article about the effect of the GST.  And this 
magazine is known to do its homework.  It's known to have some reputable 
researchers.  They report that last week StatsCanada reported that retail 
sales in January plummeted by 4.1 per cent compared to a year ago, which 
was the worst monthly decline since 1961.  Why? 
 
There's only one reason, Mr. Speaker.  There's one main reason, and that is 
the effect of this unfortunate move to go to a GST, a sales tax, when 
across the border there is no sales tax.  And now this provincial 
government wants to follow them into this same kind of madness, Mr. 
Speaker.  Same kind of madness. 



 

 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have dealt with the concept of the economic impact on 
the province of Saskatchewan.  And everywhere I look, I summarize by saying 
that the economic impact will be negative, that there will be a loss of 
jobs, a net loss of 7,500 jobs, Mr. Speaker.  That this loss of jobs will 
not be offset by any gain to the manufacturing sector; in fact the net 
result will be a loss of jobs.  This loss of jobs will lead to a loss of 
population.  The effect will snowball, Mr. Speaker, and the province simply 
cannot afford it.  Mr. Speaker, that would be a loss of population on top 
of the some 20,000 people we've been losing over the last three years as a 
result of this government's waste and mismanagement in this particular 
province. 
 
In the moment I have left, Mr. Speaker, I want to address one more 
question.  And that is, is this a fair tax?  Is this the best way?  This 
government says it's a fair tax in this sense.  They say, hey, by doing 
this we're making it fair because those people in the border communities, 
they can now buy their tills for the same price that the people in Alberta 
or across the U.S. border can buy them. 
 
Now that might be comfort, but what kind of comfort I ask you, is it to 
anybody along the border if they've got the tills at the same price, if 
they've got no money ringing into those tills and that's what they're 
after.  And you know and I know that the best thing for business is more 
business and what you're creating is a situation where business is getting 
less and less business, Mr. Speaker.  So I say that this is not fair. It is 
not fair, Mr. Speaker, because of what it's going to do to businesses, 
particularly along the borders . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 10 o'clock, the House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


