





























































Hansard: May 23, 1991


 

 

May 23/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker: -- Prior to routine proceedings I ask the Assembly for leave 
to make a statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Points of Order 
 
The Speaker: -- Yesterday I reserved my decision on two matters relating to 
the use of petitions as an obstructive tactic and to the use of superseding 
motions to combat such tactics.  I believe that the two points of order 
raised yesterday reflect the need on both sides of the House to deal with 
the broader issues that are preventing this House from accomplishing the 
public business. 
 
Today I've had the opportunity to meet with the government and opposition 
House leaders in an effort to initiate discussions to enable the House to 
resume a more normal mode of operation.  It is therefore my intention to 
further defer my rulings on these points of order at this time. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 
under the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
rule 11(2), dealing with the presentation of petitions, and I have some 
petitions to present, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to do so at this time.  The 
first petition I have is addressed to the Hon. Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan assembled here.  And the prayer in the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

 That we the undersigned support the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax on 
Reading in opposition to tax on books, magazines, and newspapers.  We 
believe that a tax on reading is a tax on knowledge and information, and 
is detrimental to our society.  Traditionally, books, magazines and 
newspapers in Canada have been exempt from sales taxes because Canadians 
have recognized the cultural, social, educational values of the written 
word.  The proposed provincial tax on reading will be the only one of its 
kind in Canada.  The Saskatchewan government's proposal to add a 7% 
provincial tax on top of the new 7% GST on books and periodicals will mean 
that readers in Saskatchewan will be among the highest taxed in the world. 

 
 We urge the Saskatchewan government NOT to tax reading materials! 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by many Saskatchewan citizens coming 



 

 

from areas such as Regina, Saskatoon, Balgonie.  I believe the majority of 
the ones on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina. And I do hereby 
lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I wish also, Mr. Speaker, to lay on the Table a 
petition with the same prayer which I just read out.  And the people on 
this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from such varied places in Saskatchewan as 
Regina, Avonlea, further ones from Regina.  I believe the bulk of them are 
from the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker.  And it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to lay the view of these people on the Table, with regard to the 
provincial GST (goods and services tax). 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition here from a number 
of Saskatchewan people.  And I want to read the prayer of this petition, 
Mr. Speaker, addressed to the members of the Assembly. 
 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the Province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
I think it's quite clear from this petition, Mr. Speaker, what the views of 
the people are. 
 
These people by and large, Mr. Speaker, come from the city of Saskatoon.  
And it gives me a great deal of pleasure to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I've been listening to the 
presentation of the petitions by the hon. member and have been doing a bit 
of research.  Regarding the presenting of petitions, the prayer doesn't 
include the whole petition.  The prayer includes that part of the petition 
which starts with the words "Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray," which 
is I believe different than the prayer that the hon. member . . . I believe 
you have been reading the whole petition. 
 
The prayer begins with the words "Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray . 
. ."  That's the prayer part of the petition and that is the part of the 
petition that we in the past have . . . that has been the practice of 
reading that portion of the petition and presenting it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate your direction on 
that matter. 



 

 

 
I have a further petition here and I won't read the prayer, Mr. Speaker, 
because it's the same as the prayer on the last petition I read.  But 
suffice it to say that these people  
 Dare concerned about the imposition of the provincial GST and urge the 
provincial government to stop this particular tax, and to not pass this but 
have a provincial election instead. 
 
These people exclusively, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Estevan.  I lay 
this petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I also want to lay another petition on the Table, Mr. 
Speaker.  This is a similar prayer on the petition.  And the context of the 
petition is the same, that the people are concerned about the imposition of 
a major tax increase such as the provincial GST, and they want a provincial 
election. 
 
These people, Mr. Speaker, are almost exclusively from Estevan, 
Saskatchewan, although I see names here from Bienfait, Eastend, Swift 
Current as well.  It's with a great deal of pleasure I lay this petition on 
the Table, which contains the views of those people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- This petition is different than the previous one, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I lay it on the Table with the same sense of gravity that I 
did the previous one. 
 
These people are concerned about the tax on reading material.  They feel 
it's detrimental to the knowledge in our society.  And they suggest that 
books, magazines, newspapers in Canada be exempt from taxes because 
Canadians have recognized the cultural, social, and educational value of 
the written word. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. While it may be different, is that the 
prayer that you're referring to?  Is that the prayer in your petition that 
you're referring to? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I was merely explaining what the petition 
was about. 
 
The Speaker: -- I know that this is . . . We have gone over this several 
times.  When presenting petitions we try not to make comments which are of 
a nature of debate or may provoke debate, and that is the reason why 
members are asked to stick strictly to the prayer of the petition and then 
therefore petitions can flow more smoothly. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you for that guidance, Mr. Speaker.  This 
petition is different from the previous petition I presented, Mr. Speaker.  
These are the words that are contained on the petition which these people 
have affixed their names to.  And they urge the Government of Saskatchewan 



 

 

not to tax reading material, and the prayer says: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to reverse its decision to 
impose this unfair tax. 

 
This particular petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by a number of people, 
some from Regina, some from Kyle, some from Tisdale, Melville; further 
ones, Yorkton, White City, and now one from Melville.  And I lay this 
petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these people who have 
signed their name upon it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- This particular petition, Mr. Speaker, deals with the 
same subject matter, that of the tax on reading material, to which the 
people have affixed their signature.  They're opposed to this new tax which 
is a tax on another tax. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now I have asked the hon. member several 
times not to repeat the prayer, and referring to the prayer is tantamount 
to repeating the prayer.  I have asked you several times.  If you persist, 
I am going to have to go to the next member.  So I recognize you once more. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, may I ask you to clarify?  Did you say 
that I cannot read the prayer? 
 
The Speaker: -- I said you, sir, are . . . Order, order.  You are 
presenting petitions page by page, and except where you have made a 
distinction, the petitions are of a like nature.  I have ruled that the 
prayer of all petitions which are of a like nature be referred to or read 
once.  After that, that the petitions simply be submitted without repeating 
the prayer or referring to it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In order to indicate to the 
House which petition this is, because I have a number of petitions here, 
this is the particular petition that's dealing with the tax on reading 
materials.  These people are opposed to the imposition of that tax and they 
state that in the prayer which is attached to the document here. 
 
The people that signed this particular petition are from such diverse 
places as White City, Regina, Prince Albert, and mostly from the city of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker.  And I lay this petition on the Table on behalf of 
those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to proceed with . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would seek leave of the Assembly to 
introduce our guests in the gallery. 
 
The Speaker: -- The member has sought leave.  I note once again that we 



 

 

have a good number of guests.  May I ask leave on behalf of all of the 
members who wish to do the same. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Seated in your 
gallery, I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members 
of this legislature, a group of grade 11 and 12 students from the great 
constituency of Melfort. 
 
These students are also from the great school, Bernard Constant Community 
School.  These students are accompanied by their teachers, Dave McGill and 
Linda Kerslake.  And it's my pleasure to welcome all of you to the 
Saskatchewan legislature.  We trust that you will have a very enjoyable and 
informative day while you're in Regina. 
 
I do look forward to meeting with you at the . . . well perhaps not at the 
conclusion of question period, but at least at 2:30 or thereabouts, and I 
hope at that time we can have some pictures and have a cup of coffee or 
juice or some such.  So welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you and to the members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 
people and friends of mine from the town of Hudson Bay.  They're here 
meeting with the Minister of Labour later this afternoon.  And they're here 
in regards to the concerns they have about the town and community of Hudson 
Bay.  I want to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We call our town the moose capital of the world or the beautiful 
north-east, and it's certainly great for them to come down to Regina.  And 
I know many of them had the opportunity to come before.  I want to wish 
them a safe journey home. 
 
I want to also invite them to come down to my office later on this 
afternoon, room 204, at 4 o'clock after they've met with the Minister of 
Labour.  And we'll discuss I believe some things that are very important to 
their community.  I'd like to ask all members of the Legislative Assembly 
to help me welcome my friends and neighbours from Hudson Bay to this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise because I would like to 
join with the member for Kelsey-Tisdale in extending greetings to the 
visitors here from Hudson Bay.  I do that because Hudson Bay has a special 
attraction for me.  It is my home town where I went to high school and I 
know many of the people who are in the gallery today. 
 
I would like to extend to them a welcome and wish them well in their 



 

 

endeavours as they are here in Regina for a purpose and look forward to 
meeting with them along with several of my other colleagues later on in the 
day.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with the member 
for Kelsey-Tisdale in welcoming the people from Hudson Bay, Saskatchewan.  
I have a long association with Kelsey-Tisdale constituency having been born 
in Tisdale and raised on a farm south-east of Tisdale.  I know that these 
people are a composite group from the Hudson Bay area and will be meeting 
with us later on today. 
 
Not only do I have that connection with that constituency, but my father 
was the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for that constituency for 
twenty-nine and a half years, which is a . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- . . . which is a long time.  And the people of that 
area have taken the trouble to erect a cairn in that area which in fact 
reflects his long service to the constituency.  So I'm especially pleased 
to join with the other two members in welcoming the people from 
Kelsey-Tisdale. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, a couple from 
Birch Hills, Mr. and Mrs. Ed Thoen.  They are in my constituency.  They are 
here to do some business and I want to welcome them, and I hope they enjoy 
their stay and their visit in Regina.  And I want to ask the members of 
this Assembly to welcome them here to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the other members of the Assembly, a group of students from 
my constituency.  I believe there is 30 grade 6 and 7 students from the Red 
Earth school in Red Earth, Saskatchewan. 
 
They've come down to spend the day here in Regina and I'm not sure, longer.  
I trust that they're going to have an enjoyable and interesting time here, 
perhaps learn a little bit about how our system works here, as well as do 
some sightseeing of other things in the city. 
 
They are accompanied as well today by their teachers Mr. Eldon Okanee and 
Mr. Ray MacDonald, and as well their bus driver, Mr. Sam McKay.  I just ask 
each and everyone of you to help me welcome them.  They've had a long bus 
ride -- it's a fairly long way to come down here.  And I know that this 
school has made an effort over the years to have student groups come down 
to visit Regina and what's available to see here. 
 



 

 

I look forward to meeting with them around 3 o'clock to discuss the 
proceedings that they have witnessed and to have some refreshments with 
them.  Please join me in welcoming my students from Red Earth. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure today to introduce 43 grade 9 and 10 students from Walter Murray 
Collegiate in Saskatoon in my constituency.  It's a collegiate of some 
1,500 students.  And I know many of these students, and I certainly know 
their parents and I'm delighted to see them.  Accompanying the students are 
David Hedlin, Avon Whittles, Walt Bykowy and Debbie Arndt. 
 
And of course we have two sons going to that school and think very highly 
of the school and of course of the teachers that are there.  And it's a 
great school, and I will be meeting with the students in a few minutes.  
And I hope that you enjoy your trip back.  I look forward to sharing a few 
comments and some juice with you shortly.  Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just want to add my 
words of greeting and welcome to the students from Walter Murray 
Collegiate.  Many of the students reside in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
and I just want to say in addition to the welcome from the member from 
Eastview, how pleased I am to have them here in the gallery this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I had not really 
intended to get up to make an introduction today, but looking up in the 
opposite gallery there I saw a young couple that caught my attention. And I 
would just like to inform the hon. members here that my son Dean and his 
new bride Brenda are here.  I guess they are back from their honeymoon, on 
the way home, and have stopped in here.  They do look a little bit tired so 
we won't take too much of their time.  And I'm very glad to see you back 
and I'll be talking to you shortly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the opportunity 
to join with other members in introducing students in the Assembly today.  
Along with the group of students from Walter Murray Collegiate in the east 
gallery which is facing me, there are a group of students from Bedford Road 
Collegiate in Saskatoon.  They are grade 9 and 10 students.  They are 38 in 
number and they are accompanied by Richard Dybvig and Carol Jensen. 
 
Bedford Road Collegiate is one of the older and highly recognized 
collegiates in Saskatoon.  They draw students from not only Westmount 
constituency, but Fairview constituency and Riversdale constituency as 
well.  And yes they have some distinguished graduates from that high 
school, some in this Chamber. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bedford Road Collegiate has distinguished itself academically 
and it has distinguished itself otherwise in sports as well.  It is 
situated approximately in the middle of Saskatoon Westmount constituency no 
matter what set of boundaries you use. 
 
So I'm very pleased to welcome all those students from Bedford Road 
Collegiate.  I'll look forward to the opportunity to meet with you later on 
and perhaps answer some questions.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to join my colleague, the MLA from Westmount, to welcome the 
students from Bedford Road.  A good number of them also live in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, in the Mayfair area. 
 
And I would also like to add my words of welcome to all of the students who 
are visiting the Assembly here today.  I think that at this time of year we 
always enjoy having students come in from all over the province, and I 
think it's an excellent learning experience for them.  I'm sure some days 
they learn much more than others, but it is an important part of their 
education, I think, to have a better understanding as to how our democratic 
system works here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I'm not going to be meeting with the students from Bedford Road today, but 
I think I am going to be visiting their school later on next week and I 
will look forward to meeting them at that time.  And I also join with my 
colleague in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In the brief 
interlude for introduction of students, I've lost track of which petition I 
was presenting.  So I will have to inform the House and myself by reading 
the prayer, Mr. Speaker, because I'm not sure which one I presented last. 
 
In any case, these people that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
concerned about the imposition of a 7 per cent tax on top of a 7 per cent 
tax on books and reading material in the province of Saskatchewan.  They 
urge the Government of Saskatchewan to not tax reading materials.  And the 
prayer says: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to reverse its decision to 
impose this unfair tax. 

 
And the petitioners come from a number of places in the city of Regina.  
These are by and large in the city of Regina, and with a great deal of 
pleasure I lay that petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to lay another petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker.  And this 



 

 

particular petition is of a different prayer, and I will read it.  These 
people are concerned about the imposition of the provincial GST in a 
general way, referring to it as a major tax increase.  And they say: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
These petitioners who've signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, appear to be 
almost exclusively from Carlton Drive in Regina, and I take a great deal of 
pleasure in laying this petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, and it's the 
same prayer as the previous one I read.  The people on this petition that 
have signed it are  
 Dconcerned about the provincial GST in a general way and its imposition 
before a provincial election, and they are from the city of Saskatoon.  I 
take a great deal of pleasure in laying this petition on the Table. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't want to occupy the whole of the time.  I know 
other members have petitions they want to lay on the Table, so I'll cease 
laying petitions on the Table for today after a couple more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These particular residents of Saskatchewan are concerned in a general way 
about the imposition of the proposed provincial GST and they ask that the 
government not proceed without having first gone to a provincial election.  
These people are, Mr. Speaker, exclusively from the city of Saskatoon, and 
I lay their petition on the Table.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The final petition I want to lay on the Table today, Mr. Speaker, is from 
residents who are concerned about the imposition of the sales tax on books, 
magazines, and newspapers.  And it's different than the previous prayer.  
They're praying that the Assembly ". . . be pleased to urge the Provincial 
Government to reverse its decision to impose this unfair tax." 
 
These people that signed this petition are all, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
from the city of Regina and it's with a great deal of pleasure that I lay 
this petition on the Table.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Pursuant to rule 11, I'm 
honoured to be able to bring petitions to the Assembly along with my other 
colleagues here today.  These petitions that I wish to present, Mr. 
Speaker, are different in the prayers but all of the same nature, Mr. 
Speaker, in that they express opposition to the provincial GST. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to make one clarification, and I 
allowed the hon. member from Saskatoon Westmount to get through his 
petitions.  What the hon. member -- from what I could gather -- was . . . 



 

 

he had two prayers which were the same and then he would revert from one to 
the other.  I'm not going to allow you to do that.  You have two prayers.  
How you choose to submit them is up to you, but you don't keep referring to 
them.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, and in fact that was my 
intention, to present of a similar prayer together.  And I think that's 
what you're asking in the presentation of petitions to this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners on the first petition I'd like to present are 
asking that the provincial government . . . are of the view that the 
provincial government does not have a mandate to introduce the provincial 
goods and services tax.  And they pray then, and I will read the prayer, 
Mr. Speaker, to make it abundantly clear what they're asking. 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until . . . the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a 
provincial election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these people on this petition all come from the city of 
Saskatoon, with the exception of one petitioner here, Mr. Speaker, on the 
full sheet, who is from the community of Central Butte which is in the 
constituency of Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my honour on behalf of these petitioners to present 
their view to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer and same request of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, it is my honour to present another petition.  The petitioners 
on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from several communities around the 
province of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners come from Star City, from 
Melfort, from Beatty, from Kinistino, from Rose Valley, from St. Brieux, 
and also from Mistatim, and one petitioner here from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my honour again on behalf of these petitioners to 
present their wish to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer, I have the honour of 
presenting another petition on behalf of another, I believe it's 25 
petitioners, who are from . . . it would appear that they are from three 
communities.  The bulk of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
city of Regina -- from all parts of Regina, from several different areas of 
the city -- as well as from Sedley, and as well as from Richardson, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on their behalf, it is my honour to present this petition to 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further petition of, I believe, this is 21 petitioners who, 
again with the same prayer, are asking that the goods and services tax be 
withdrawn until there is opportunity for an election in Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, all hail from the city of Saskatoon, 
without exception.  And again they're from several areas of Saskatoon 
ranging from Degeer Street to McKinnon to Main Street and Connaught Place.  
Some of these may even be friends and neighbours of members of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I note as well that there are some who sign their addresses rural route 
address, which I assume signifies that they are doing their . . . receiving 
their mail in the city but are in fact rural residents in the Saskatoon 
area.  On their behalf, Mr. Speaker, it's my honour to present this 
petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another petition.  This I believe is another 25 petitioners.  
These people, Mr. Speaker, are from . . . all from the city of Regina, from 
all parts of Regina, ranging from Park to Francis to Woodlawn to Angus and 
Burns and Cushing and Broadway, and so on.  There are several other streets 
and crescents within the . . . and avenues within the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners again submit this petition with the same 
prayer as the previous ones, and as with those it is my honour to allow for 
them the democratic expression of their wish to this their Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, these petitioners that I have before me now 
express the same prayer.  I recognize two or three of these, as a matter of 
fact, Mr. Speaker, who I would consider to be personal acquaintances.  
These petitioners are all from the city of Moose Jaw.  And those that I 
recognize are seniors, Mr. Speaker, who again request that the province 
withdraw the tax and call an election to earn a mandate.  They come from 
places such as Victoria Park Towers and Fairford Street in Moose Jaw.  And 
on their behalf I am particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, as the 
representative from that city, to bring their will to this their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again with the same prayer and for the same reasons, this 
would be I believe in the neighbourhood of 28 or 29 petitioners who ask 
that their signatures be submitted on this same prayer as well, Mr. 
Speaker.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from Asquith and the 
remainder of them all appear . . . most of them have Saskatoon beside them.  
Some of them, Mr. Speaker, have addresses and I assume by the location here 
that they are also Saskatoon people.  And so on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, 
it is my honour and my privilege to present their will to the Legislative 
Assembly by presentation of this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to present as well another petition.  These 
are also largely Saskatoon people, although I see Blaine Lake in an address 
here as well, Mr. Speaker.  This would be some 20 or 25 people all of whom 
are in the northern part of the province.  This petition is the same prayer 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These people come from different parts of Saskatoon such as Louise Street, 



 

 

1st Street, Churchill Crescent, McCormack Road, Mills Crescent, Ruth 
Street, and several others, Mr. Speaker.  They appear to be from several 
sections of the city of Saskatoon as well as Blaine Lake of course.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, on their behalf it's my honour again to present this petition 
to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what's interesting is that although this is a petition with 
the same prayer, it is done with different print, and although the prayer I 
will not read it, it is identical to the previous that I've submitted.  
What it also tells me, Mr. Speaker, is that there are petitioners who, not 
able to get a copy of one that had been printed, have drafted their own.  
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is something that leads me to be 
particularly pleased to submit this because this is done with some extra 
effort on the part of these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this . . . oh, there's some on the back here as well; I'll 
advise the Clerk, Mr. Speaker.  These petitioners all appear to be from the 
city of Regina, as I look at the address, with the exception of a Pilot 
Butte person.  The remainder all appear to be from Regina, ranging from 
Rothwell Street to Dewdney, Truesdale, Froom Crescent, and Bayda Crescent 
and so on.  They're virtually all from different streets, Mr. Speaker, and 
it is my honour to present their will to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my distinct pleasure to present another petition.  This 
petition is signed by people who are from Beechy as well as from the city 
of Saskatoon.  I don't know what parts of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, because 
these are all signed just simply Saskatoon, identifying their community.  
It's with the same prayer as those that I've previously submitted, Mr. 
Speaker, and so these are people who obviously are of the view that the 
GST, the provincial GST, should be withdrawn by the government until it 
earns a mandate through a provincial election.  And it is my privilege, Mr. 
Speaker, to present their wish to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
-- to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to present another petition on behalf of some 
additional -- I believe it's 25 -- citizens of . . . They are all from 
Saskatchewan.  These people, Mr. Speaker, come from a combination of 
Saskatoon and Regina.  And I have one here -- I have difficulty reading the 
writing -- they either live on a Portland Crescent or they're from 
Portland, but I think it's from a Portland Crescent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These people are again of the same view as those who signed the petitions 
that I previously submitted, with the same prayer, and on behalf of these 
people from streets such as Wallace and Atkinson and Bastedo and Francis 
and Elphinstone and Borden and Broadway.  People will recognize . . . Those 
who signed them will recognize those streets, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 
pleasure to submit them to this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have before me another petition which it is my pleasure to 
present.  These petitioners are all from the city of Saskatoon except for 
one who's from Hendon, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Again I don't know what 
parts of Saskatoon those who indicate here; they note only the name of the 
city.  And it's with the same prayer as the previous petition.  Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, on their behalf I am honoured to present their will to this their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are also from the city of Regina with the 
same prayer.  These petitioners are from Wascana Greens and from 10th 
Avenue -- and there seem to be several from the same apartment block here 
by the looks of it, Mr. Speaker.  Again they are of the view that the 
provincial government should withdraw the provincial GST until it earns a 
mandate in a provincial election.  And on their behalf I submit this 
petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well these petitioners are all on 8th Avenue, and I believe 
that these are from Regina.  I'm just noting the community on here, Mr. 
Speaker.  These people again submit their petition with the same prayer as 
those that I've previously submitted.  And in respect of the democratic 
process, it's my honour to submit this as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are some people that I recognize as personal friends.  
And these are people, Mr. Speaker, who  
 Dare on this petition -- it looks as though someone went down the block -- 
these are people from Iroquois Street West, in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  
This is no surprise that there are petitions here from Moose Jaw.  And 
we've heard Moose Jaw being referred to frequently, Mr. Speaker, because 
petitions have been located all over the city and people have been going 
door-to-door with them. 
 
And so on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, as member for Moose Jaw, it is my 
particular pleasure to present their petition requesting that the 
provincial government withdraw the provincial goods and services tax and 
call an election to earn a mandate to take such action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is from Argyle Street in Regina, and a similar petition 
with the identical -- not similar, identical petition, Mr. Speaker.  And on 
behalf of the folks on Argyle Street in Regina, I'm pleased to submit their 
will to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again from Moose Jaw, I'm pleased to submit this petition.  
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough, come from two parts 
of the city of Moose Jaw: from Duffield West, which is an area represented 
by . . . and very well represented, I might add, by the member from Moose 
Jaw South. 
 
The member from Thunder Creek will take particular interest as well, Mr. 
Speaker, in petitions coming from 16th Avenue . . . Oh, sorry, this is 
South West.  Well he might be interested in that too, but these are not in 
the . . . The member from Moose Jaw South assures me that he's interested 
in the petitions of anyone from 16th Avenue South West and he is. 
 
And I, on his behalf as well -- although I have the honour of formally 
submitting it, Mr. Speaker -- I submit this. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recognize some more folks here.  This petition is entirely 
made up from people in Moose Jaw.  These people are from both 
constituencies of Moose Jaw North and South.  I recognize, Mr. Speaker, the 
same prayer as those that I've previously submitted, and people who are of 
the view that a mandate can be earned to introduce a provincial goods and 
services tax by calling an election.  And, Mr. Speaker, on their behalf it 
is my honour indeed to present this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have five more petitions to present and then I will take my 
place.  This is the final one that I wish to present today, Mr. Speaker, 
which is of the same prayer, and then I'll be going to a different prayer.  
But this is the final one I wish to present today, Mr. Speaker, from people 
who are expressing the view that the government does not have a mandate to 
introduce a tax and should call an election before attempting to introduce 
the provincial goods and services tax. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are all . . . several indicate Regina and 
the rest, I believe, are Regina addresses.  And, Mr. Speaker, on their 
behalf it is my honour to submit their will to this their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to submit what I believe would be about 25 names from 
petitioners who express their opinion to this Legislative Assembly, 
specifically in terms of a concern for the tax being placed on reading 
materials.  So they focus specifically, Mr. Speaker, urging the provincial 
government to withdraw the 7 per cent GST on books and periodicals, and 
express their concern that this tax which they're currently paying makes 
readers in Saskatchewan among the highest taxed in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won't debate that point although I think my view is probably 
quite obvious. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are from several places around Saskatchewan.  Oh, 
I even see Alberta here.  But, Mr. Speaker, they're from Alsask, which 
would be right on the border of Alberta and Saskatchewan; they're from 
Swift Current, they're from Lashburn, one from Saskatoon, Kindersley.  
Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, from as far away as Tappen, British 
Columbia.  They are opposed to the tax on reading here in Saskatchewan.  
More from Alsask, from Oyen, Alberta, many from Alsask -- boy, they must be 
upset about this in Alsask, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf . . . this petition, interestingly enough, 
Mr. Speaker, comes from citizens in western Canada who are opposed to the 
reading tax imposed by the PC (Progressive Conservative) government in 
Saskatchewan.  And on behalf of all these people, Saskatchewanians, 
Albertans, and British Columbians, I present this view to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this is . . . I said before, one of the 
things that's interesting is that there have been people in Saskatchewan 
who have literally been so upset that they've not waited for a petition to 



 

 

come around and have drafted their own.  And this is another one.  These 
are all with the same prayer but interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, whereas 
it's typical that you find petitions with a fair amount of space to write 
names, this has been hand drawn, and I would estimate would encompass about 
50 to 60 signatures per page.  They're squeezing them in here, Mr. Speaker, 
in order to express their view. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are expressing their opposition to the 7 per cent 
PST (provincial sales tax), and if I can read the prayer: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to refuse to extend the PST to goods and services which have 
not previously been subject to tax. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these people are simply opposed to the 7 per cent PST in any 
way, shape or form no matter how it comes, and they are to be complimented 
for their efforts to oppose this tax. 
 
And as I look at this petition, Mr. Speaker, I'll read some of the names of 
the communities.  But I'm very pleased to say that the large, large 
majority of people on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from my home city of 
Moose Jaw.  I see petitioners here from 1st Avenue North East, from 
Hawthorne Crescent, from Langdon Towers, from Skipton Road, and Grandview 
Street and Manitoba Street, Coteau and Hastings.  Member from Moose Jaw 
South is particularly interested in these. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not only from Moose Jaw, this is an international 
petition.  There is . . . oh, no, I think someone perhaps was being 
frivolous here.  I'll scratch that one out.  I didn't see the name. 
 
From Ross Street and Brown Street and Francis and Ominica and Simcoe, 
Hastings, Duffield, Home, Queen Crescent. From the city of Regina; the town 
of Mortlach. Some rural box addresses; Iroquois Street; Mossbank. From 
Morse -- there are several here from Morse who are opposed to this tax.  
Several from Viceroy, and from Langdon Crescent; from Hearne, from Rouleau, 
from Wolfe, from Grandview.  Mr. Speaker, these folks are from all over.  
And several just simply list Moose Jaw. 
 
So on their behalf I am very, very pleased to present their will -- to see 
the PST rejected in all shapes and forms -- to this their Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this next petition is one that the current 
member for Thunder Creek will want to take significant interest in.  It's 
the same prayer, Mr. Speaker.  And I recognize that some of these 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, live in the part of the current constituency of 
Moose Jaw North, which is my honour to represent, but which, if the 
proposed boundary changes do develop, will fall into the constituency of 
Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are people . . . 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. Order.  It's not a large issue but I 
think you are making a comment there which could be construed as provoking 
debate, and I ask you to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- I thank you for that ruling, Mr. Speaker.  It is not my 
intention to provoke debate, but simply to present the views of these 
people which is very clearly, in their point of view, undebatable, I would 
think. 
 
These folks, Mr. Speaker, from Moose Jaw, Brown Street -- I see them from 
the town of Marquis -- from Thorn Crescent, from Wood Lily Drive, from 
Coteau, from Dunn, Athabasca, Duffield, Montgomery, some rural post office 
box numbers -- several of those; Athabasca was quite busy -- from Clifton, 
from the Canadian Forces Base.  I see here from Fairford and 2nd Avenue 
North West and Hall and Alder, and from Assiniboia, from the town of 
Assiniboia, from Dundurn. 
 
This may very well have been signed during the band parade, Mr. Speaker, 
but on behalf of all of these people . . . on behalf of all of these 
people, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to present their objection to the 
PST in this, their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, this is again with the same prayer; again this is 
another 50 to 60 people largely from Moose Jaw.  And just to recognize 
where these people are from, again the member from Moose Jaw South and I 
will take interest, as might one other member like to note, or more.  And 
these, Mr. Speaker, come from parts of Moose Jaw like Aster Crescent, from 
Stadacona and Ominica and Monk and Main and Coteau and 3rd Avenue, and from 
the town of Caronport, from Maple Street and 6th Avenue and Coteau West and 
Queen Crescent and High Street and King Crescent; others from the same 
streets; from Vaughan and Fairford and Athabasca.  Mr. Speaker, this one 
has been all over the city; from Francis; many who just say Moose Jaw, and 
10th Avenue North West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I conclude by submitting, with great honour and in respect of 
the democratic process, and the right for these people to have their will 
known in this Legislative Assembly, that they object to the 7 per cent 
provincial goods and services tax being unfairly imposed by the PC 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As was the case with 
the two members before me, I rise to present petitions.  Following what I 
understand to have been Mr. Speaker's ruling, I will omit part of the 
petition and read what follows the word "wherefore", which I gather is what 
you said we could do. 
 
This petition then says: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 



 

 

until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 
These people who are therefore opposed to the PST . . . This petition is 
some 20 names from Saskatoon: Woodward, Moxon, McKenzie, Lorne, Avenue H, 
McKinnon, McKinnon, Dunning, Barabas -- that's a strange name but that's 
what it looks like; and one from outside the city, presumably a rural 
person with a post office box in the city.  These people ask the Government 
of Saskatchewan to get a mandate before they pass the PST. 
 
I will submit that.  Thank you. 
 
These names are interesting, Mr. Speaker.  One hops around the province.  
Some of these names I've not heard before.  Well here's one that I defy 
anyone to tell me precisely where it is:  it's called Watson Lake, Yukon.  
The petitions are being presented, I gather, by people from across Canada, 
or at least western Canada, because they're afraid that this many happen in 
their jurisdictions. 
 
(1500) 
 
This one, Mr. Speaker, comes from the city of Prince Albert.  One doesn't 
know where because someone signed just P.A. and the rest all did the same.  
Some are from outside the city because they've post office box 293.  There 
are some from 10th street, some from Plaxton Place, and one from 22nd 
Street East.  These people have asked that the government seek a mandate 
before proceeding with the Bill.  I'll table this and I thank the page. 
 
This is the petition in virtually the same form, Mr. Speaker -- well it's 
not virtually the same form, it's precisely the same form.  And we're back 
to Saskatoon . . . no, not entirely; this one is all over the province.  
Really got the four corners covered on this one.  We have some from 
Haviland Bay, Deborah, East Place -- I think those are all in Saskatoon.  
Then out of Saskatoon to Colonsay, back to Saskatoon, down to Regina, west 
to Melfort . . . east to Melfort rather.  And quite a number of others, I 
think from Saskatoon, from Easthill, from Fusedale, Jackson, Swan, 
Thiessen, Murphy, Blain, Taylor, and a few from the Saskatoon district 
because they've given post office boxes.  I'll submit this as well. 
 
This one moves further south, Mr. Speaker -- some names that will be 
familiar to virtually anyone I think in Saskatchewan.  We have three from 
Regina, one from the very pretty community of Regina Beach, another from 
Kelliher, and one from Maryfield, that is south of Moosomin about 20 miles.  
One it says Churchill Downs; it's the riding that I have been nominated in.  
A couple more Regina, one from Lumsden, one from White City, one from Hill 
Avenue in Regina, and a few others from Regina. 
 
These people, as has been the case, ask that this government seek a mandate 
before proceeding with the PST.  I'll ask the page to take that to the 
Table.  Thank you. 
 
This is a petition, Mr. Speaker, in the same form, and we're going back 
north to Saskatoon again.  These names are from all over the city of 



 

 

Saskatoon.  It's an issue which apparently cuts across community lines.  
Bell Crescent . . .  I'll read a sampling of these streets.  Bell Crescent, 
Wilson, East Place, Baldwin, Ewart, 11th Street, Glasgow -- that's got to 
be Glasgow Street -- Laurentian Drive, Adelaide, Preston, Louise Street, 
Eastlake, Wilson, Riel, Wollaston, Munroe, and Preston.  No street repeated 
on this.  These are from . . . these people from all over Saskatoon have 
asked this government to seek a mandate before this major tax increase. 
 
Yet another petition, Mr. Speaker, from the same community obviously.  
Again I'll read out the streets and will not, in the interest of time, in 
the interests of the efficient use of the legislature's time, I won't 
repeat any that appear more than once. 
 
There are some who live on Avenue F, some who live on 2nd Avenue, some who 
live on 8th Street.  We see Wilson Street, Louise Street, Parkdale street, 
Lindsay Street, East Heights.  One St. Henry Avenue, Taylor Street, 
Eastview, Swan, East Heights, 4th Street East.  Obviously people from 
around the city of Saskatoon, who want the government to seek a mandate 
before passing the PST.  I thank the page for his kindly attendance to 
that. 
 
Remaining in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, we have another petition urging the 
government to stop the PST and seek a mandate.  Again we have some from 
Bedford Road, Tache or Tache, depending on the nationality of the name, 
Tache Crescent, Avenue F North, Avenue L South, 33rd Street West, Avenue O 
South, Saskatchewan Avenue, Cumberland Avenue, Cumberland Crescent -- I 
guess that's different -- Bedford Road, 22nd Street West, 6th Avenue, 
Avenue P, 3rd Avenue North, 8th Street, 32nd Street, Avenue G North, and 
King Street. 
 
From all over Saskatoon, people are urging this government to seek a 
mandate before passing the PST.  And I'll ask the page to present that. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, moves again further north to what might 
generally be described as the Prince Albert and Shellbrook area.  The first 
name is from Prince Albert.  The second name, I won't give it but I know 
these people are from Holbein, Saskatchewan.  Holbein is a community some 
20 miles west of Prince Albert. 
 
Some more from Big River, some more from Spruce Home, which I think is 
close to Prince Albert; some from Smeaton, and a large number from Prince 
Albert who have asked that this government not proceed with the PST until 
it has a proper mandate for doing so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition takes us back to Saskatoon again -- these people 
asking the provincial government to stop the PST before introducing it.  
People from around the city of Saskatoon, 32nd Street West, Avenue F, Crean 
Lane, Turtle Crescent., Avenue K South, Saskatoon; Barren Lane -- some of 
these names are very picturesque -- 22nd Street West, Avenue G North, 
Saskatchewan Avenue, Avenue F North, 32nd Street, Avenue C North.  Then one 
that is right out of the city altogether in Big River, a fair distance from 
Saskatoon actually -- one who has listed their address as Super Place -- 
I'm not sure what that is or what it refers to.  A couple more from 



 

 

Saskatoon.  These people have asked that the provincial government seek a 
mandate before proceeding with the PST. 
 
This petition is also from Saskatoon, by about 20 people I would judge 
quickly, who urge the provincial government to stop the PST until it has a 
mandate.  These people are from Sandy Court -- this looks like the 
sanatorium, perhaps there is such an address -- 6th Avenue North, 22nd 
Street, Hoey Avenue, East View, Shannon Lane, Saskatoon; Avenue I North, 
Empire Avenue, and R.R. 4 -- obviously someone from outside the city of 
Saskatoon who gets their mail in Saskatoon.  As has been the case with the 
others these people have asked the provincial government to seek a mandate 
before imposing this large tax increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this takes us further south quite a distance to Regina.  Some 
eight names this time from people who asked the provincial government not 
to introduce the PST before seeking a mandate.  All are from Regina.  We 
don't know where because the first person on the list put down Regina, 
Saskatchewan, and the others have all done the same.  So one can only 
speculate about where these people come from.  They do however ask the 
government to get a mandate before proceeding with the PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition takes us back to Saskatoon.  This is sort of a 
travelogue around the province.  This takes us back to Saskatoon people, 
some 10 in number, who've signed this petition, who ask that the provincial 
government stop the PST before getting a mandate. 
 
They would appear to me to come from different parts of Saskatoon -- McEown 
Avenue, Salisbury Drive, Niderost  
 DStreet, Coy Avenue, Moxon Crescent, Clark Crescent, Baldwin Crescent, 
Glasgow Street, and a couple who have just listed it as Saskatoon.  As has 
been the case with the others, these people ask their provincial government 
not to proceed with this tax until they have a clear mandate to do so. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, takes us back to Duffield Street . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Actually back to Moose Jaw, that's right.  Someone 
helps me out.  Duffield is obviously in Moose Jaw, and by the sounds of it, 
in Moose Jaw South, in the riding of Moose Jaw South. 
 
These people ask the provincial government to stop the provincial GST until 
the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity to pass on it.  They come 
from -- Moose Jaw has such picturesque names -- Duffield, Coteau Street, 
Home Street, Grandview Street, a couple from outside, one in particular 
from Tuxford, one as well who lives on Iroquois Street. 
 
These people all from the city of Moose Jaw -- with one exception, I think, 
from Tuxford -- ask that the provincial government seek a mandate, a clear 
mandate before proceeding with this tax.  With the assistance of the page, 
I'll lay that on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition takes us back to Prince Albert, of people who 



 

 

are asking . . . these are some 20 names, 20 people who ask the provincial 
government to stop the PST.  These people are from Prince Albert and 
district, I guess one could say, although sometimes they're a fair ways 
out.  From Prince Albert, and then I think we proceed north to Candle Lake, 
to Cochin Lake, Emma Lake -- very pretty communities.  The others I would 
judge to have come from the city of Prince Albert itself. 
 
These are people who, as has been the case in the past, ask the government 
to seek a clear mandate before passing the tax.  I'll table that as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, these names put a bit of a premium on your 
knowledge of Saskatchewan streets, because there's no cities.  This one is 
Regina.  This is a petition -- the wording is the same; the format of the 
wording is a little different but the wording is precisely the same, so I 
won't read it -- indicates that the source of the petition is more than 
just one, that people are taking the necessary steps to reproduce these on 
their own. 
 
As has been the case in the past, they ask the government to stop the GST.  
These are from all around Regina, virtually every corner.  Leopold 
Crescent; can't read that; Darke Crescent, 15th Avenue, south Albert, 
Hamilton Crescent, Hamilton Street -- actually different parts of the city. 
Haultain Crescent, Discovery Street, Shannon Road, Runciman Crescent, 26th 
Avenue, Castle Road, Lake, College, Downey Crescent, Montreal Street.  
That's my constituency actually -- 2300 block Montague; 6th Avenue North, 
Lothian Mews.  I apologize if I haven't pronounced that properly; the 
writing isn't terribly clear.  Jenkins Drive, Athol Street, Argyle Street, 
Hillsdale, and lastly 4th Avenue.  Virtually all corners of the city 
covered in this petition. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You missed one street. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- That's possible. I'll go through them again if the 
members want, to be sure.  I would table that.  I'd ask the page to take 
that petition to the Table and Table it in the formal way. 
 
We are, Mr. Speaker, this time back to Saskatoon, by some 20 people. I 
think there's 20 spaces on this form -- 20 people who ask the government 
not to proceed with the provincial sales tax, the changes to the provincial 
sales tax, that is, without seeking a clear mandate. 
 
These people are from various places in Saskatoon.  Again virtually no 
street repeated; 4th Street East, York Avenue, McEown something, 5th Avenue 
North, Hoeschen Crescent -- I hope I pronounced that correctly -- Sturby 
Place, Louise Street, Lindsay Drive, Jarvis Drive, Tuber Crescent -- that 
sounds odd -- Tucker Crescent, Fisher Crescent, Kingsmere Boulevard, Moxon 
Crescent, Louise Street, Hoeschdale Crescent -- I don't think that's right, 
but that's what it appears to be -- Lake Crescent, and the last one is just 
unreadable.  These signatures obviously by a very elderly person because 
the handwriting is very shaky.  The place is just simply not readable. 



 

 

 
These people, as has been the case in the past, urge the provincial 
government to stop the PST before they have a clear mandate to do so.  And 
I'll ask the page to take that to the Table. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is again same wording, different format -- and 
one has to quickly check that it is the same wording -- of people who ask 
the provincial government to stop the PST.  They come mainly from Regina, 
but not entirely: from Garnet Street in Regina; Rose Street, my 
constituency actually, 2200 block Rose Street; Argyle Street in the 
southern part of the city; Wallace Street; Procter Place; 25th Avenue; 
Broadway -- one is just moving around the city here; Froom Crescent; south 
Albert and north Albert; Robinson Street; Castle Road; a couple I'll come 
back to in a moment -- they're not from Regina; Underhill Crescent; Knowles 
Crescent; Glen Elm Trailer Court; Cameron Street, again, my constituency; 
Glen Elm Trailer Court again; a couple I can't read; Dewdney Avenue; Hudson 
Place, and Anson Street. 
 
There are some from outside the city.  These are probably people who were 
in the city shopping and signed the petition.  One is from White City, 
which is east of the city; the other is Rouleau, which is about 30 miles 
south of the city.  These people have asked the provincial government not 
to proceed with the PST without seeking a proper mandate.  If I have the 
co-operation of the page, I'll table that petition. 
 
Still basically in Saskatoon -- in Regina, rather, I have another petition 
of some 20 names of people who ask the provincial government to stop the 
provincial GST without the proper mandate.  This is going to take a little 
less time, Mr. Speaker.  These people just simply put as an address, 
Regina.  So one has to assume it is the city of Regina. 
 
There is one exception and that is someone from Pilot Butte, a small 
community some 10 to 15 miles -- well I guess not all that small, growing 
actually -- a bedroom community some 10 to 15 miles east of Regina.  
They've signed this petition asking the provincial government to seek a 
proper mandate before they proceed with the PST.  If I have the 
co-operation of the page, I'll table that.  Thank you. 
 
From Regina, Mr. Speaker, we go back to Saskatoon again.  The petition is 
in the same form.  In summary, they are asking the provincial government 
not to proceed with the PST until after a provincial election. 
 
Again it appears to be different parts of Saskatoon.  Conn Avenue, 8th 
Street East, Pembina, East Drive, Arlington, Melrose, 33rd Street West, 
Louise Street, East Centre, Louise Street, Kingsmere Boulevard, Montreal.  
Oh, this is from Regina.  Somehow or other, a Regina name is inserted here 
from Montreal Street in Regina. 
 
The next name is from a place that . . . I thought I would recognize any 
community in Saskatchewan after 16 years in provincial politics, but I've 
never heard of Saskap, R.R. 5.  Ah, it's an abbreviation for Saskatoon.  
R.R. 5, Saskatoon.  Louise Crescent, and five more from Saskatoon.  These 
people have asked that the provincial government not proceed without a 



 

 

mandate. 
 
This one, Mr. Speaker, is entirely from the Regina district by all 
appearances.  I may be surprised as I go through it but I think that's 
accurate.  This is some 20 people who have signed this petition in the same 
form asking the provincial government not proceed with the PST prior to an 
election.  They come from all parts of Regina as has been the case here. 
 
It's evident, Mr. Speaker, without getting debate, it's evident that what 
is happening is that places of business are getting customers to sign these 
as they come in, so we have an interesting case here of businesses working 
with their customers for a common aim. 
 
These people are from 2600 block 12th Avenue, 2600 block Argyle Street, 
2600 block Argyle -- same one. Courtney, Glen Elm Trailer Court, Broad 
Street, one from out of town that I'll come back to, Rae Street, from the 
100 block Hamilton, from Cook Crescent, from Froom Crescent, from my own 
constituency, 1800 block St. John Street, 6 Shaw Street -- that's an 
apartment so I won't give the apartment number -- Champ Crescent, Glen Elm 
Trailer Court, Spooner Drive, something called Little Bay.  Also in 
addition, one from Davin, Saskatchewan, a community of . . . a very 
pleasant community about 50 miles, 40 miles east of Regina. 
 
These people from -- I think we've covered seven or eight constituencies in 
Regina -- get together, signed this petition in unison, asking the 
provincial government not to proceed until it has got a proper mandate in 
an election.  I'll ask this page to table that for me. 
 
I will not be very much longer, Mr. Speaker.  Perhaps a couple more and 
then I'll cede the place here.  These are all from Saskatoon actually and 
district, I guess one would have to add.  Some 20 people who have joined in 
a petition asking the provincial government to stop the PST before they 
seek a proper mandate.  From Harvard Crescent, Eastview, Quance, 
Saskatchewan Crescent, Heritage Lane, Tait Place, Avenue A North, Rita 
Crescent, King Crescent -- it seems every community in Saskatchewan has a 
King Street or a King Crescent -- Easthill, Mulcaster Crescent, Avenue U 
North, Avenue U South, Preston, Ewart, and Louise Avenue.  There's also 
some from . . . one from . . . Well I guess I wouldn't describe either of 
these as a Saskatoon district.  Another one is from Allan, Saskatchewan and 
yet another one from Kelliher, Saskatchewan. 
 
These are people, Mr. Speaker, who've got together, joined together to ask 
the provincial government to seek a proper mandate before increasing this 
very substantial tax. 
 
I have another form of petition, Mr. Speaker, which I think is in order.  
I'm going to read it and I guess I will be advised in due course at some 
future sitting as to whether or not in fact it is in order.  I think it is, 
but it's entirely different. 
 
The body of it reads: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that the Honourable Legislative 



 

 

Assembly may be pleased to refuse to extend the PST to goods and services 
which have not previously been subject to the tax.  And as in duty bound 
your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
So I think that's in order. 
 
What we're finding from these petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
public are preparing their own petitions in their own wording, and in some 
cases they understand that a certain format must be followed.  So what we 
have is in anger terms, I guess, is sort of a case of spontaneous 
combustion. 
 
These people are all from Saskatoon: from Macklem Drive, from Davidson 
Crescent, Avenue X North -- I guess there is such a place -- Devonshire 
Way. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's Westmount. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- That's Westmount, I'm told.  I thank the hon. member 
from Westmount for that advice.  From MacDonald road, McPherson Avenue, the 
next one's absolutely illegible, and from Avenue I South. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I'll discontinue reading these petitions.  There 
are many more but I know other members are anxious to present petitions and 
to speak on behalf of people who have come to them.  So I'll cede my place 
with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan.  And the petitioners that I have here are concerned that the 
provincial government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the petitioners that I have here are from many places 
in the province, including Regina, Balgonie, Kindersley, White City and 
other areas.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I lay this on the Table. 
 
I would also like to lay on the Table another group of names who are also 
opposed, the same as the other petitioners were, Mr. Speaker, and they also 
come from a wide range of communities in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
they are showing their concern by filling out these petitions. 



 

 

 
And they come from a number of communities also, including Abernethy, 
Lintlaw, White City, Wolseley, and Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: -- I would like leave to introduce students, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is with great pleasure to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 52 students, grade 3, 4, 
and 5, 6 from Kenaston School, Kenaston, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to congratulate the Kenaston School.  I've been their 
MLA for 13 years, and there's hardly ever been a year in those 13 years 
that they haven't made a tour to the Assembly.  So they must like something 
here, what goes on here, or maybe just the visits we have, or what they 
see.  There's not too much going on here right now, just reading the 
petitions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I'll have an enjoyable time with them after they leave 
the Assembly.  We're going to have pictures, a little talk together.  And 
they are joined together today, Mr. Speaker, by their teachers, Michael 
Hertz, Yvonne Schmid, Susan Bunga.  And their chaperons are Idelle Westman, 
Karen Bloomfield, and the bus driver is Ken O'Dell.  I'd like all members 
of the Assembly to please join with me in thanking them to come to the 
Assembly today.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  When I was 
closing off, I had a petition that I wanted to lay on the Table.  And as I 
indicated, the petitioners were from Regina, Wolseley, White City, Lintlaw, 
and Abernethy. 
 
I also want to lay on the Table another petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 
another group of individuals who have also signed a petition.  And this 
group of individuals come from many areas of the city of Regina -- Dewdney 
Avenue, and Regina south, Regina north, and also from Whitewood.  Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would also like to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I also have another petition that I want to lay on the Table, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and this is another large group of Saskatchewan citizens who are 
also expressing their concerns.  And they come from such areas as Craven, 
Semans, and Balgonie.  I lay that on the Table, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also want to lay on the Table another petition, and this is a group of 
citizens from different areas of southern Saskatchewan.  And I see from 
Moose Jaw, Lillooet Street; and I also see some names on here from 
Caronport, Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I also want to lay this 



 

 

petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I also have here another petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that I also want to table.  And this is another group of petitioners 
signing this petition and they come from R.R. 3, Saskatoon, and also from 
the city of Saskatoon.  I'd like to lay this on the Table, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another 20-some names, petitioners who I want to 
also lay on the Table, coming from areas of Moose Jaw South, Moose Jaw 
North, and other areas of the city of Moose Jaw, also expressing their 
concerns by signing this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also have another petition here and it is also from the city of Moose 
Jaw.  And I see some of the street numbers here, High Street -- yes I 
believe it's High Street -- and Grandview Street.  And this group of 
petitioners here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are all from the city of Moose Jaw.  
And I would like to lay this petition on the Table also. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another group of petitioners here that have 
signed their names to the petition and I also want to table.  And they come 
from the city of Regina in such areas as Forsyth Crescent, Lorne Place, 
Cornwall Street, Fulton Drive, Molloy Road, and Lorne Street.  And these 
are all from the city of Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I now want to lay 
this petition on the Table. 
 
I also have another petition here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a number of 
names, and they come from a large area of the city of Regina.  And I see 
areas in here of Pasqua Street, Castle Road, and Killarney Way, and they're 
all from the city of Regina.  And I would also like to table this petition, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also now want to table another bunch of names that I have here, a group 
of citizens who have signed the petition, and they come from areas of the 
city of Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I see Dufferin Road in Regina, and 
there's a number of others, Durham Drive and Shannon Road, all in the city 
of Regina.  And they have all signed this petition and I would also like to 
lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now want to table another petition signed by 20-some 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan who are also opposed to the PST 
tax.  The citizens who have signed this petition come from the city of 
Prince Albert and they come from Yellow Creek, Saskatchewan.  There is a 
large number here and they have also shown their . . . indicated that they 
are opposed to the tax by signing this petition.  And I now want to table 
this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also want to table another petition signed by a group of Saskatchewan 
citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in this petition the big majority of them 



 

 

come from the city of Regina.  And I see Cambridge Avenue, King Street, 
Eastview, Dewdney.  And there are also individual citizens who have signed 
here from White City.  I now want to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Also want to take this opportunity to lay on the Table another petition of 
petitioners who are also opposed to the provincial PST.  And they come from 
areas of Regina and I just want to give you some of the addresses.  There's 
Dewdney and Brook Bay.  And there's also individuals who have signed this 
petition and they come from the town of Simpson, Balgonie, and Lipton.  I 
now want to lay this petition also on the Table. 
 
I now also want to lay, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the Table, another number of 
petitioners who have signed this petition.  And they come from areas of 
Regina.  I see Fleet Street, Francis, Avon Drive, and also there are 
individuals on this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who have signed it and 
they are from White City.  And I want to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has been signed by a 
number of petitioners from a number of communities in the province, as I 
indicated before, all opposed to the provincial PST.  And they come from 
such areas as Balgonie, Balcarres, Regina, Craven, and Lumsden.  I now want 
to lay this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I want to lay on the 
Table.  And it is a petition signed by citizens of the city of Regina.  And 
I see there's Rae Street and MacKenzie Drive, I believe, in Regina.  I now 
want to table this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now also want to lay on the Table another petition, 
and this petition is signed by citizens of Regina, who as I indicated 
before, are also expressing their concerns about the PST by signing the 
petition that I now want to lay on the Table.  And they come from such 
areas as Bennett Drive, and I see there's from the town Findlater, and 
Cameron Street in the city of Regina.  And I now want to lay this petition, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, signed by a number of 
citizens from the city of Regina, and I see Hammond Road and Montague 
Street.  And these are all citizens of the city of Regina.  I now want to 
lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition here by a number of petitioners 
who have also signed expressing their concern with the legislation that we 
are dealing with, and they come from such areas as White City, Esterhazy, 
and from the city of Regina.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to also lay 
this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here.  And I am just about through, 
and so I just have a few more petitions that I would like to lay on the 
Table.  The one that I have here in particular is from a large number of 
communities around southern Saskatchewan.  I see that there are petitioners 
here from Kronau, Fort Qu'Appelle, Regina, and Gainsborough.  And I would 
also like to lay this petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I only have a couple more to lay on the Table and I 
will be finished. 
 
The ones that I have here that I want to lay on the Table are petitioners 
who have signed this petition, and they come from such areas as Melfort and 
Goodeve and Hudson Bay.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to lay this petition 
also on the Table. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this one is from the 
city of Regina and such areas as Halifax Street, Montreal Street, Retallack 
Street.  And I would also like to lay this petition on the Table, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is the last one that I have to lay on the Table, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it's signed by a number of Saskatchewan citizens who are also 
expressing their concerns with the provincial PST.  This petition that I 
have here is mainly all from the city of Regina.  I see Rothwell Crescent 
and Pappas Crescent. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to now lay this final document that I'm 
presenting today on the Table.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I'm very pleased 
to present a series of petitions on behalf of residents in my own 
constituency of Saskatoon University expressing opposition to the expanded 
PST or provincial GST, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
These residents are saying that the provincial government does not have a 
mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase 
represented by the provincial GST and they are asking the Legislative 
Assembly to stop the provincial GST at least until the people of the 
province have had an opportunity to pass judgement on it during a 
provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first petition that I'm pleased to present is from 23 
residents, all of whom live on Simon Fraser Crescent in my constituency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a second petition with the same prayer, this 
time from residents on Weir Crescent.  And on behalf of these residents I'm 
pleased to present this second petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have a third petition once again expressing opposition to the provincial 
GST, this time signed by 10 residents of Kirk Crescent in my constituency 
and 15 residents of Quance Avenue in Saskatoon University riding.  And on 



 

 

their behalf I present this petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a fourth petition expressing opposition to the 
provincial GST, this time signed by 12 residents of Carleton Drive and a 
resident from McGill Street in my riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition in opposition to the provincial GST.  
This one is signed again by several people from Carleton Drive, also four 
residents of Argyle Avenue, eight residents of Preston Avenue, and seven 
residents of Rutter Crescent in my constituency.  And on behalf of these 
residents I present this petition to the Assembly. 
 
I have here another petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, expressing opposition to 
the GST, signed by seven of my constituents who reside on Copland Crescent 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another 20 signatures on a petition from residents 
of Carleton Drive in my riding expressing opposition to the provincial GST 
and asking that it be dropped, at least until such time as a provincial 
election has been held. 
 
And I have here a ninth petition from residents of my riding, again with 
the same prayer, Mr. Speaker.  Eighteen of these signatories are from 
Garrison Crescent and three are from Leslie Avenue in my constituency. 
 
Another petition here.  This one again expressing opposition to the 
provincial GST signed by 15 of my constituents who live on Cumberland 
Avenue South, eight of my constituents who live on 14th Street East, and 
eight of my constituents who live on Lake Crescent.  And on their behalf, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I present this petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have another petition, again with the same mandate.  This one, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is signed by 22 residents from Lake Crescent, three from Bate 
Crescent, and three from Leslie Avenue, once again asking the legislature 
for the provincial GST to be dropped. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here another petition from residents of my 
riding.  This time some 25 signatories from Brevoort Park and College Park 
asking me on their behalf to present to the legislature this petition 
expressing their strong opposition to the provincial GST. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, just in the last 10 days alone I've presented now over 
a thousand signatures just from my own riding of people opposed to this 
unfair tax.  But I have in addition to my own constituents, I have 
petitions here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from a number of other Saskatchewan 
residents also urging the provincial government to stop the provincial GST.  
These petitioners are from Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan -- 20 petitioners who've 
signed this petition asking that the GST be stopped. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition again with the same mandate, 
this time signed by a variety of Regina residents.  They're from Dewdney 
Avenue, Grey Street, Harvey Street, Royal Street, Ritter Avenue, King 
Street, Princess Street, Garnet Street, Smith Street, Paynter Crescent, and 



 

 

Victoria Avenue and Osler Street in the city of Regina.  And on their 
behalf I present this petition to the Assembly. 
 
Likewise, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition from Regina residents 
in opposition to the provincial GST signed by residents of Hird Crescent, 
Helmsing Street, Duncan Crescent, Alport Crescent, Bannister Bay, Hancock 
Bay, King Street, Princess Street, Houston Road, Rupert Street, MacKay 
Street, White City, McDonald Street, and Rae Street from the city of 
Regina, again expressing their opposition to the provincial GST. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition signed by residents of 
Moosomin, Francis, Rouleau, and 14 signatures from Regina, again with the 
same mandate opposing the provincial GST.  And on their behalf I'm pleased 
to present this petition to the Assembly. 
 
I have another petition here in opposition to the GST, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this time signed by residents of Lumsden, Regina, and Weyburn, 
Saskatchewan, urging that the GST at least not be implemented until a 
provincial election is held. 
 
I have another group of Saskatchewan residents who are exercising their 
right to petition the legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  These are from 
Moose Jaw.  They're from 2nd Avenue, 7th Avenue, Grafton Avenue, Bluebell 
Crescent, Clifton Street, Arrowhead Road, and Coteau Street West and Main 
Street North. And all of these residents, some 20 signatories are 
expressing their opposition to this major tax increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have another petition with the same mandate signed by residents of 
Lafleche, and also Simcoe Street, 4th Avenue South West, and Lillooet 
Avenue West in Moose Jaw.  And on behalf of these petitioners, I'm pleased 
to present this petition to the Assembly opposing the provincial GST. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here another petition, again with the same 
mandate, signed by residents of Edgar Street, Elliott Street, and Lindsay 
Street in Regina, expressing their opposition to the tax.  And on their 
behalf I'm pleased to present this petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have another petition here in opposition again to the provincial GST.  
This one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is signed by residents of Rockglen and Ituna, 
Saskatchewan.  And also, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of residents from 
Lacon Street in Regina who've signed this and from Dewdney Avenue and Bond 
Street in Regina, expressing their opposition to the tax. 
 
I have here a petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, signed by a number of residents 
from Middleton Crescent -- I assume that's in Regina, though I'm not 
certain -- once again with the same mandate, the same prayer on the 
petition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm pleased on behalf of residents of Regina from Olson 
Place, Shannon Road, Toronto Street North, Garnet Street, King Street, 
Cornwall Street, and Dryburgh Avenue, and Tremaine Avenue to present this 
petition opposing the provincial GST. 
 



 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition here, again with the same 
prayer, signed by residents of Trudelle Crescent and Lindsay Street, 
Regina, asking that the provincial GST not be implemented. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here another petition that appears to be largely 
although not exclusively signed by Regina residents.  They include the 
signatories from Regent Street, Avonhurst Drive, Retallack Street, Montague 
Avenue, Cameron Street, Lawson Avenue, and Shore Bay, expressing their 
opposition to the tax increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition, again with the same mandate.  
This one has been signed by residents of Rothwell Street in Regina, Pilot 
Butte, Portland . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to draw your attention to a 
point of order.  It was on May 17, 1991, the Speaker of the House had 
stated, "Order.  Yesterday. . ."  If I can read into the record: 
 

 Order.  Yesterday I was moved to invoke a parliamentary usage of the House 
of Commons which allows hon. members to rise once each day to present 
petitions.  The reason, as you recall, I invoked that usage of the House 
of Commons was because I felt that hon. members were rising over and over 
presenting the same petition.  And by doing so, they were unduly using up 
the time of the House. 

 
Today, today while hon. members it is true are rising once, they are once 
more presenting the same petition over and over, like petitions.  I have 
listened to two members who have presented the same petition, like prayers, 
over and over.  And the third member is now, after having listened to two 
of hers, seems to be doing the same thing. 
 
Therefore I'm asking members to do the following: that they present all 
like petitions at one time, all like petitions.  If they have the same 
prayer, to present them all at one time.  If you have a petition with a 
different subject matter, that's another issue.  But if all like petitions, 
I am asking you to present them at one time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that alikeness has been an occurrence this afternoon.  
And we've all witnessed that now for almost two and a half hours.  And I 
would like you to rule . . . and I would like my privilege as a member to 
be upheld in this Legislative Assembly so that I too may once again be able 
to see this Assembly come back to some order and I would have my right 
given back to me as a private member, the privilege of being able to carry 
on my representation of minority and majority individuals from my riding of 
the Cut Knife-Lloydminster constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I as a private member do not have any rights in this Assembly 
any longer.  And I feel that it's up to the Chair to impose upon this 
Assembly some guidance and to bring it back to an order where we can all 
function as private members in this Assembly. 
 



 

 

I'm asking you, sir, to consider what the words were read into the record 
by the Speaker on May 17, and I beg your indulgence and to please make this 
ruling stick. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like to take a 
moment to respond to the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd's point of order.  I'd 
like to say, in reply to the point of order, that the members here have 
been following the ruling made by Mr. Speaker on May 16 -- I believe it was 
May 16.  At that time he clearly indicated that each member could rise once 
a day to present petitions, and I think we've been following that very 
closely since that day. 
 
I believe we've been presenting petitions for four days since then, and the 
Speaker, who has obviously observed what has been taking place here for a 
number of days, has concluded that his ruling is being followed. 
 
And I think that the right of members to present petitions is not a new 
phenomena; it's been going on for decades, if not centuries.  And in fact 
the members opposite, colleagues in Ontario I think at this very time are 
presenting large numbers of petitions from people in Ontario who are 
opposed to the deficit being run in that province. 
 
And I may not agree with those people who are petitioning the Government of 
Ontario on that issue, but it's certainly their right under the rules of 
that Assembly and the rules under this Assembly that members, pursuant to 
rule 11, can rise and present petitions. 
 
And of course you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the reason for petitions 
is to allow the public to be represented here in the House.  And there are 
those who would argue we should even go further than that.  That when it 
comes to issues like this, and I know the Reform Party, many members of the 
Reform Party would argue  
 Dthat not only should people be able to send petitions to the members, but 
like city council and other governments, could actually come to this 
Assembly and not only sign a statement, but come to the bar and argue 
against the tax.  And this happens in city council, as you'll know that the 
delegations come and they actually speak directly to the Assembly. 
 
And I'm not arguing for that today, but the petitions represent all of 
those folks who have taken the time and energy to sign the petition. 
 
And members opposite, the government who is trying to limit debate on Bill 
61 and now trying to limit petitions, I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are 
the ones who are being obstructionist to the very people who want to 
petition the members of this Assembly. 
 
Now this is a very, very important democratic process, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
Obviously the government has the right to introduce Bills and they have 
done that.  And they have the right to introduce closure as the rules 
clearly state.  But I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that . . . 
 



 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member should keep his 
comments to the point of order, not to legislation that's before the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The petitions that we have been referring to, Mr. 
Speaker, the Bill that I'm referring to obviously apply to the Bill that's 
referred to in the petition that is being presented.  And I want to make it 
clear that I'm very much on the point of order of the petitions that are 
being presented that deal with the opposition. 
 
And I want to just read that prayer so we're clear on what it is that we're 
dealing with: 
 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from the 
proposed provincial GST. 

 
And I want to say clearly that members in the opposition have been rising 
once a day pursuant to the ruling of the Speaker, which the member opposite 
clearly disagrees with.  But if that right is taken away, that members can 
rise and present petitions, then a century-old tradition of people being 
allowed to sign a prayer to the Assembly to petition the members of the 
Assembly would be done away with. 
 
I want to speak to that issue of the rights of people to petition the 
members of the Assembly.  The rules are very clear in the book that this 
Assembly works on and the rules that we work under, that we are allowed to 
present petitions. 
 
And I want to say that I would really say to the members opposite that the 
fact that we are getting now in the area of a hundred thousand names on 
these petitions, if not over that by tonight -- my colleague from Saskatoon 
says we're now over a hundred thousand, and we have probably another 30,000 
waiting to be presented -- indicates to you the outrage that there is in 
this province against a government in the dying days of its mandate, 
introducing a Bill like this that would take over $400 million . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The point of order before the Assembly is 
the right to present petitions or not present petitions, but not the 
content of the petitions.  So I'd ask the member to keep his comments on 
the point of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I just wanted to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
closing that the right of members to petition is a very ancient and very 
accepted procedure.  And I find it surprising and shocking that government 
members would continually attempt to interrupt the presenting of this 
petition to the extent of rising day after day and attempting to cut off 
the presentations of petitions. 
 
But I'm sure that the ruling given by Mr. Speaker on May 16 would clearly 
indicate that we're well with order.  And I'm sure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will find that as well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I want to make one additional 



 

 

comment in addition to the comments made by the member from Regina 
Elphinstone, which I endorse.  I want to make an additional comment and 
that is about the propriety of you yourself dealing with this issue.  I do 
so because yesterday the Government House Leader rose in his place and the 
gravamen of his comment was, as I now understand it, was that the form . . 
. the manner in which the petitions were being presented were 
obstructionist and therefore an abusive process.  And as a result he had a 
right to move to do something quite unusual -- move a superseding motion in 
routine proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker took that matter under consideration and has not yet rendered a 
decision.  I want to say in defence of Mr. Speaker's position, the Speaker 
in Ontario has done exactly the same thing.  He in fact . . . I gather he 
has said he won't render a decision until next week.  He's been at it for 
two weeks, so there is some precedent for the Speaker's position. 
 
But the Speaker has taken the very issue which the member from 
Lloydminster, Cut Knife-Lloyd, raised, he's taken it under consideration.  
For you now to deal with the same thing, you're dealing with an issue which 
the Speaker has under consideration, and I suggest it's not appropriate. 
 
I just want to say with respect if you should find it not to be an adequate 
reason -- I think that's determinative -- I think you should simply tell 
the hon. member that the matter is already under consideration, Mr. 
Speaker.  If you find it . . . If you don't find that, I'd ask you to 
consider something else. 
 
These are general comments, but I will keep them brief. 
 
What we are witnessing in this country is a ground swell of opposition by 
the public to impotent legislatures.  What we have in Ontario is a Finance 
minister who tried to present a budget speech 10 days ago -- still hasn't 
got it because the opposition Conservative and Liberal members in the 
Ontario House are blocking the delivery of the budget speech. 
 
If you just be patient.  I said I wouldn't be long, but I do think it's 
relevant. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- I'd ask the member for Moose Jaw North to allow the 
member for Regina Centre to make his comments without interruption. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I appreciate your ruling.  I appreciate your ruling.  
One sees . . . and again I will be brief, but I want to make this comment 
because I think it's really fundamental. 
 
What we see in Ontario is an opposition, apparently with the consent of the 
public, stopping the government from presenting one of its fundamental 
acts, the budget speech.  What we see is the Reform Party in western Canada 
and now indeed throughout Canada, finding ways so that the public can 
directly participate in the process of the legislature.  That's what 
they're doing.  They're getting the public into this building 
participating. 
 



 

 

I say to Mr. Speaker and to members opposite, we had better be cognizant of 
that ground swell of public opposition.  We have here as well an opposition 
which by all accounts with the consent of the public is stopping the 
government from doing something they don't want done. 
 
What we have, Mr. Speaker, is a ground swell of public opposition to the 
treatment of legislatures as an impotent institution.  What the public in 
Ontario are saying, what the public in Saskatchewan are saying, and what 
the Reform Party has understood, is the public want legislatures to play a 
meaningful role in the business of government.  And when the legislatures 
represent real public opposition, they ought to have the mechanism to do 
so. 
 
At the moment, Mr. Speaker, the only mechanism which is available to this 
opposition is petitions.  If the closure motion is withdrawn, then of 
course there's a new . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The petitions are the question.  The 
point of order is on the petitions and not on the content of the petitions. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I was about to conclude, Mr. Speaker.  I was about to 
conclude. I didn't want to go on long. 
 
I do want to make the point that across this country we are witnessing by 
the public a real anger and opposition to governments which flout public 
opinion and which do not permit legislatures adequate opportunity to bring 
public opinion to bear on the business of the day.  That's what's going on 
in Ontario; it's what's going on here; it's what the Reform Party sense and 
have picked up on. 
 
I say to members opposite and to Mr. Speaker, you interfere and you ignore 
public opinion on this very basic issue at your peril.  You may or may not 
get away with it this time.  But if you ignore public opinion on the issue 
of the rights of legislatures to exercise some accountability in 
government, there's going to be a real day of reckoning at, I suggest, not 
too distant future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I've listened to arguments 
from both sides of the House.  And being that the point of order is 
somewhat similar to the one yesterday, it's under consideration of the 
Speaker and I feel that that should be brought in by the Speaker.  And with 
that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I'm pleased to present another petition in opposition to the 
provincial GST.  I won't repeat the prayer, but it's the same prayer as the 
ones I was presenting prior to the point of order being called. 
 
This one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is signed by residents from Pleasantdale; 



 

 

from Melfort, Saskatchewan; from St. Brieux; and from Tisdale, and one 
signature from Saskatoon.  There are about 15 signatures on here from 
Melfort, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have another petition with the same prayer.  This one is from residents 
both of my constituency and the constituency of Saskatoon Eastview -- 25 
signatories from Preston Avenue in Saskatoon expressing their opposition to 
the provincial GST. 
 
I have a third . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- A point of order, Mr. Speaker.  I have accepted your first 
ruling, but as a private member of this Assembly from the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster and with my privileges taken from me in this Assembly, I 
am petitioning the Speaker of this House to bring a ruling into this 
Assembly, sir, so that my rights are allowed to come back into this 
Assembly. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that my rights have been invoked upon by a 
bunch of radical members of the opposition, and I have . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  It's difficult to hear the member 
when other members are interfering with the proceedings of the House. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I have no rights as a 
member any longer in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have for some time now have happened to be sitting in this 
Assembly to keep quorum in this Assembly to help play part . . . take part 
in this Assembly to help keep quorum in here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when members are getting phone calls from their 
constituents and are having to represent constituents or having to 
represent them through different departments in the government, it takes 
time for me as the Government Whip to allow members of this side of the 
House time to leave to do their work to represent their  
 Dconstituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that right has been taken away.  I am having to keep my people 
here at close proximity to the legislature while members of the opposition 
carry on with petitions.  And otherwise what they've done in the past, Mr. 
Speaker, as soon as there's not enough members on this side of the House to 
keep the quorum, they call quorum and the House is adjourned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a complete failure of any kind of a ruling of a type 
of a decorum in this Assembly.  And I think it is time, Mr. Speaker, that 
that decorum comes back into here.  Otherwise I as a member am isolated 
from being able to do anything on behalf of my constituents, be it the 
minority or majority of whatever the members opposite talk.  I don't 



 

 

understand how the Chair can possibly say that they're not going to bring 
that kind of decorum back into this Assembly. 
 
How does one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how does one as a member analyse himself 
in his daily routine in saying I represented my constituents?  I can't 
return phone calls.  I can't do constituency work any longer because I have 
to sit here and listen to petitions that could be laid on the Table at one 
time and we could be getting . . . carry on with the traditional . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have already ruled on the question 
of the petitions, so I don't think that that need to be brought up.  It's 
under consideration by the Speaker and the Speaker will bring in his ruling 
in due course. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm not rising in regards to the 
petition, I'm rising in regards to my privilege as a private member of this 
Assembly. My privilege is not . . . I have no privilege any longer, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  It's been taken from me.  And I am petitioning the Chair 
to give that privilege back to me as a member so I can duly carry on the 
duties that I have been elected for and that has been representing the 
people of my riding, be it the minority or the majority in my riding which 
I do represent. 
 
I represent people from all political stripes, be it Reform, NDP (New 
Democratic Party), Liberal, or Tory.  I represent them, Mr. Speaker, as 
they call upon me to act on their behalf.  And that privilege has been 
taken away from me, sir. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I would like to make a 
few remarks briefly on the comments of the member opposite who should not 
feel restricted from going and making a phone call, if he wishes, because 
there are plenty of members on the opposite side there who can be here and 
take part in the debate and listen to the petitions being presented.  
That's not the problem here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the member's opposite arguments were to be upheld, they are contrary 
totally to what the government opposite is attempting to do.  If the 
government opposite invokes closure on this Bill, the right of that member 
is restricted to speak in this debate in the same way as the members of 
this House will be restricted to speak in this debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And I think it's important for the member opposite to 
consider that in the remarks that he makes on his comments.  If he is so 
concerned about the need for members to speak to represent the views of the 
people of this province on this very important issue, his first and 
foremost obligation should be to speak to his House Leader, to speak to his 
Premier and insist that this motion for closure be rescinded so that the 
debate on this Bill could continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the ruling of the Speaker of 
several days ago was very clear.  The ruling was that members of the House 
could not rise time after time after time and present petitions.  Some 
people will disagree with that ruling, but that is the ruling which has 
been accepted, and we accept the ruling of the Speaker. 
 
And so therefore the new process which is being followed is that members 
are rising in their places and they are presenting petitions, and not 
several times on the same day, but on one occasion.  That's been the 
established practice for the last several days and it's been working very 
well and it seems to have been quite acceptable. 
 
Now I agree with what you have just said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
it was a good and important point to make -- that the Speaker in his wisdom 
earlier today, because of what occurred yesterday, said that he needed the 
time, as you said, to deliberate on and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member from Moose Jaw North keeps 
interrupting members that are on their feet, and I will warn him for the 
last time that if he is going to try and disrupt the legislature in this 
manner . . . And this is the last warning you'll get today. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Before I was interrupted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Speaker said that he needed the time to consider, because of the complexity 
of the events that took place yesterday, what his ruling should be.  And I 
think that that's really quite appropriate.  And the Speaker has our full 
support in his decision to do that which you confirmed here today. 
 
It should be remembered by all of us, every member in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, that the first and foremost right that exists in this Assembly is 
not the right of individual members as much as it is the right of the 
citizens of this province to be heard.  That's the first and foremost 
right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- From time to time we may talk about privilege.  But it 
is the privilege and the right of citizens to be able to express their 
opinion, and the only way that they can express their opinion is through 
the debates in this House, which is being restricted, or through petitions, 
and that's being done.  And the member is -- whatever it is he is trying to 
do would lead, if he was to be upheld, to the restriction of that right of 
citizens to be able to present their petitions. 
 
This Legislative Assembly isn't here to serve the members.  We're here to 
serve the people who elected us through this Legislative Assembly.  It is 
here to serve the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and their rights 
should not be restricted. 
 
The member's point of order, and now he calls it privilege, flies in the 
face of the three very fundamental things that need to be considered here. 
 
First of all, it flies in the face of the ruling which the Speaker made 



 

 

earlier and it flies in the face of the comment that Mr. Speaker made here 
this afternoon in which he said he needed time to consider the situation.  
Secondly, it flies in the face of citizens to petition this legislature and 
to be heard.  And thirdly, it's contrary to the very fundamental right of 
freedom of speech. 
 
Now if we lose that, Mr. Speaker, as members or as citizens through 
petitions, then the very fundamental basis upon which the democratic 
parliamentary system of government is based is destroyed. 
 
And so I simply say, Mr. Speaker, that the member's opposite point of order 
or privilege is out of order.  And I concur with your earlier ruling that 
the Speaker said this afternoon he wanted time to consider the motions of 
yesterday and the discussions of yesterday and he ought to be given the 
time to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- I have again listened to both sides and I find the 
point of order not well taken because it's under consideration of the 
Speaker and he will be in with a ruling in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased 
on behalf of a number of residents from Saskatoon University constituency 
to present another petition in opposition to the expanded 7 per cent PST.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these petitioners are from both College Park, East 
College Park, and Brevoort Park in my constituency.  And on their behalf 
I'm pleased to present this petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Likewise, Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with the same prayer in 
opposition to the PST from residents in Greystone Heights and Grosvenor 
Park in my riding.  And on their behalf I'm pleased to present this 
petition to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have one final petition to present this afternoon.  
This one, sir, has a different prayer so I would just like to briefly 
summarize it.  It is in opposition to the tax on books, magazines, and 
newspapers, and it specifically objects to the tax on reading as a tax on 
knowledge and information which the petitioners believe is detrimental to 
our society.  The petitioners are asking that the provincial government 
reverse its decision to impose the unfair tax on reading. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these petitioners are from both my constituency 
and also residents in Saskatoon Eastview.  And I see that there are two or 
three petitioners from Regina who've also signed this petition, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And on behalf of these residents of Saskatchewan, I'm very 
honoured to present this petition to the Legislative Assembly.  Thank you 
very much, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise also pursuant to rule 11 to 
present petitions to this Assembly.  My understanding is that I have this 
right to do this during routine proceedings and I have petitions regarding 
the goods and services tax. 
 
The prayer in this petition is: 
 

 . . . that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the provincial 
government to stop the provincial GST until the people of the province 
have an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial election. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this petition that I'm presenting now comes from 
the city of Moose Jaw.  It represents a number of people who live on King 
Crescent, Normandy Drive, Simcoe Street, 5th Avenue North West, Hopkins 
Crescent, Grace Street, 2nd Avenue North East, Moose Jaw.  Some of these 
are senior citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they are as I said, urging the 
government to stop the provincial GST.  I present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
I have another petition.  This one also from the city of Moose Jaw, from 
streets like Wolfe, from Coteau Street, Atha Street West, Grandview, 8th 
Avenue North West, Iroquois Street West, 9th Avenue North West, Alder 
Avenue, 11th Avenue North West, Ominica Street East -- many constituents 
who are concerned about the GST and have asked us to present these 
petitions in the legislature. So I am pleased to present this petition on 
their behalf today. 
 
(1630) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, as required I have signed this petition 
to indicate that it's been accepted by a member of the legislature.  This 
is another petition with the same prayer regarding urging the provincial 
government to stop the provincial GST.  This petition also comes from the 
city of Moose Jaw, and the people who have signed it all live on Connaught 
Avenue, except one person from Saskatchewan Street West. 
 
I'm sure that many of these citizens from Moose Jaw are seniors, and as the 
senior critic, I am pleased to present the petitions from Moose Jaw.  I 
know they're concerned about this provincial sales tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition with the same 
prayer urging the government to stop the provincial GST.  And this petition 
that I'm bringing in now comes from the city of Prince Albert.  There are 
people who've signed it who live also in Emma Lake, Saskatchewan; 
Frankslake, Saskatchewan; Birch Hills, Saskatchewan; and there's one 
signature on this petition from Regina, Saskatchewan.  So all around the 
province people are concerned about this petition, have asked me to present 
it to you on their behalf.  I'm pleased to sign it, and I present it to the 
Legislative Assembly. 



 

 

 
Another petition, Mr. Speaker, from Prince Albert, also the same prayer 
urging the provincial government to stop the provincial goods and services 
tax.  This is a petition from people living on 3rd Street East, on River 
Street East, on 15th Street West, on 25th Street East in Prince Albert, 
15th Avenue, Kemp Crescent in Prince Albert, 8th Street East, Helm 
Crescent, 14th Street West, and 21st Street East.  So from all around the 
city of Prince Albert, a petition with 20 names on it opposing the goods 
and services tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another petition from Prince Albert -- some of the same 
streets but many different streets; many, many people who are praying that 
the Honourable Assembly will urge the provincial government to stop the 
provincial GST.  And so on their behalf I exercise my right to present this 
petition and to urge the Honourable Assembly to listen to the voice of the 
people of the province. 
 
The people on this petition from Prince Albert come from 22nd Street East, 
from Johnson Court, from 14th Street West; from R.R. 3 in Prince Albert, 
which is out in the rural areas; from McLellan Crescent, and from 6th 
Avenue West.  A full petition of 20 signatures of people opposed to the 
provincial sales tax. 
 
Now this petition that I present now, Mr. Speaker, is also 20 signatures of 
people opposed to the goods and services tax, asking a member of the 
legislature to present this petition on their behalf.  The people on this 
petition live in Meath Park, Saskatchewan; Weirdale; a number of people 
from Choiceland, Saskatchewan -- in fact, one, two, three, four, five, six, 
seven, eight of the signatures are from Choiceland. Snowden, Saskatchewan; 
four from Mair; from Smeaton; and from Prince Albert itself.  Again 20 more 
people opposed to the provincial goods and services tax.  And I'm pleased 
as a member of this Assembly to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as has been pointed out by my colleagues, these petitions are 
numerous.  We have over 100,000 of them.  Here I have another petition with 
another 20 names on.  This petition comes from the city that I'm pleased to 
represent in the legislature, from Saskatoon. 
 
And I know as I was collecting signatures outside the Midtown Plaza, how 
concerned the people are about the goods and services tax.  It's the same 
prayer urging the provincial government to stop the provincial GST.  All 
the people on this petition come from Saskatoon except one person who comes 
from Humboldt, and that person has signed this petition as well. 
 
I'm pleased as a member of the legislature to present this petition to the 
Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, as it says in rule 11, each one of these petitions 
shall be signed by a member of the Assembly, and I have signed all these 
petitions. 
 
Here's another one with 20 signatures on it and this also is a petition 
from Saskatoon.  This is a petition with the same prayer, urging the 
provincial government to stop the provincial GST until the people of the 
province have an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial 



 

 

election. 
 
And the people on this petition live on Keeley Crescent, McAskill Crescent, 
Willow Street, Adelaide Street, York Avenue, Victoria Avenue, Calder 
Crescent, 29th Street, Williams Avenue, Gladmer Park, Melrose Avenue, 
MacLean Crescent, Broadway Avenue, Hanover Avenue, Melrose, Kelvin, Wilson 
Crescent, Broadway, and Williams Avenue -- 20 signatures of people coming 
from different streets in the city of Saskatoon.  The opposition to the 
sales tax is very broad and universal. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of presenting another petition.  
And this one is being presented by me and signed by me on behalf of people 
who live in other areas of the province.  Many of the people on this 
petition -- and again it's 20 signatures -- come from the town of Melfort, 
Saskatchewan.  But there are also people from Bellevue, a signature from 
Saskatoon, one from Wilkie, one from St. Brieux, one from Saskatoon . . . 
two from Saskatoon on this petition.  All of them asking that the 
provincial government stop the provincial GST.  And I'm pleased on their 
behalf to present this petition to the legislature. 
 
The next petition I have, Mr. Speaker, is also full, 20 signatures, many 
from the town of Melfort, as was the petition that I just presented, 
because people all around the province are opposing this tax.  People who 
have signed this one are from Melfort, there's a signature from Prince 
Albert, there's one from Saskatoon, there's one from Grenfell, Gronlid, but 
most of them are from Melfort.  And on behalf of the people of Melfort 
who've signed this petition opposing the goods and services tax, I'm 
pleased to present it for the consideration of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition that I'm presenting now is from the city of 
Moose Jaw.  Obviously the people in Moose Jaw are very concerned about the 
goods and services tax, because they have signed this petition with the 
same prayer on it. 
 
The Speaker: -- One might tend to want to refer to and repeat the prayer 
without realizing it, but I'm going to have to draw your attention to it.  
I'm going to ask you strictly to adhere to that ruling. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, as I present these petitions from the people of 
Moose Jaw, I do so because I know they are concerned about the issue that 
we are presenting petitions about, the goods and services tax.  I just want 
to indicate that that's what this petition is about as well. 
 
The Speaker: -- I have been trying to be quite lenient on this issue of 
repetition of the prayer, and I believe I have been. 
 
I'm going to just once more bring it to the hon. member's attention that 
you simply having indicated the prayer, present the petitions without any 
further debate or reference.  Present the petitions.  I think the hon. 
member will agree with me that I can't repeatedly stand up and draw it to 
your attention.  I will simply have to move to another member. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, the petition that I'm presenting now is the same 



 

 

as the one that I've just presented.  This one has also signatures from 
Moose Jaw, one signature from Saskatoon.  And I'm pleased to present this 
to the Assembly on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another petition from Moose Jaw on the same topic.  
This one comes from people who live in a variety of streets in Moose Jaw -- 
Hochelaga Street West, Duffield Street West, Brown Crescent in Saskatoon.  
There's one person from Saskatoon on this petition and one from Assiniboia.  
The other signatures come from Nettle Place in Moose Jaw, Calypso Drive in 
Moose Jaw, Ominica Street West in Moose Jaw, Grafton Avenue, Algoma Avenue, 
Gordon Road.  There's a signature here from Spring Valley, Saskatchewan; 
one from Regina, Saskatchewan; from Michener Drive.  From Hall Street West, 
Vaughan, Iroquois Street West in Moose Jaw, Willow Avenue in Moose Jaw, and 
one signature from Hearne, Saskatchewan.  I'm pleased to present this 
petition on behalf of those petitioners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition that I'm presenting now on the same topic, the 
goods and services tax, is from Moose Jaw -- mostly the signatures from 
Moose Jaw; one from Assiniboia, Saskatchewan; and one from Bruno, 
Saskatchewan.  I present this petition on behalf of the petitioners and 
bring it to the attention of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, this is another petition from Moose Jaw, very 
concerned people who live on Fairford Street West, Athabasca Street West, 
Fairford Street East, Grey Avenue, Stad East, Pascoe, POTC Moose Jaw, 
Carleton Street, 6th North West, Outfield Street, Stad West, Cree Crescent, 
some with a box office, Outlook Avenue . . . Stadacona, abbreviated to 
Stad, and some from a box office, and one from Outlook Avenue.  A full 
petition of 20 signatures from the city of Moose Jaw, and I present on 
behalf of those petitioners. 
 
And another petition from Moose Jaw, from Wellington Drive, from 11th 
Avenue North West, and one from a box office in Moose Jaw -- a petition 
with three signatures on it.  I present this as well on the same topic. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Moose Jaw are very concerned about the issue 
that this petition addresses.  It's the same issue as the other petitions.  
Another 20 signatures, coming from Aster Crescent, Atha West, Fairford 
Street West, Coteau Street West, Stadacona East, 4th North West, High 
Street West, a box office in Moose Jaw, Monk Avenue, Athabasca, Selkirk 
West, Hall Street West, Duffield Street West, 14th Avenue, Grace Street, 
1st North West, Ominica East.  And, Mr. Speaker, these are coming from all 
over the city of Moose Jaw.  And on behalf of the petitioners, I'm pleased 
to present this to the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have another petition, this one also full, on the same 
topic, urging the Assembly to pay attention to the people of Saskatchewan 
who live in Moose Jaw -- Gordon Road, Marshall Crescent, Normandy Drive, 
9th Avenue South West, and two signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, 
from Craik, Saskatchewan.  So the opposition is beyond . . . 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Arm River constituency. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- This is Arm River constituency.  The others are all from 
Moose Jaw.  And I am pleased to present this petition to the Assembly on 
their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in Moose Jaw are very upset.  Here is another 
petition with 20 names on it, all from the city of Moose Jaw.  And as I 
say, many of them will be seniors who are concerned about the provincial 
sales tax, the same topic as the other petitions.  Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to present this petition to the Assembly on behalf of these people 
from Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition that I present now comes mostly from the city of 
Moose Jaw.  Bushell Park, Saskatchewan is one signature on here.  Albert 
Street West, 2nd North East, and there's one signature here from 
Glentworth, Saskatchewan.  So I am pleased again to present this petition 
on behalf of these petitioners, to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now another full petition on the same topic, Mr. Speaker -- the topic that 
we've already identified -- and I have many petitions to present to you on 
this topic of the goods and services tax. 
 
This one's from Moose Jaw as well, but there's a signature here from 
Hearne, Saskatchewan.  There are people who come from Main Street in Moose 
Jaw, Brown Street, Connaught Avenue, Monk Avenue, Hastings Street, many 
who've signed from Moose Jaw without the street address, but there's also 
someone from Drinkwater, Brown Street, and one signature on this petition 
from Coronach, Saskatchewan.  I am pleased to present this petition to the 
Assembly on behalf of the people.  And I have signed this petition as well 
as the others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another full petition from the city of Moose Jaw.  They are 
very busy opposing the tax and they are very concerned.  It's the same 
topic, the same prayer, the goods and services tax -- 20 more signatures 
from the city of Moose Jaw.  They are from businesses and from seniors and 
from the people in general and families who are hurting.  And I am pleased 
to present this petition to the Legislative Assembly on their behalf. 
 
Here's another petition from the people of Moose Jaw on the same topic, on 
the goods and services tax.  And this petition come from Cartier Avenue, 
post office boxes, Aster Crescent, Maple Street, Atha East, Grandview, 
Coteau West, one signature from Todd Lake, 5th Avenue North West, Stadacona 
West, Daisy Crescent, Iroquois Street West, Arlington Avenue.  I present 
this petition on behalf of the petitioners from Moose Jaw. 
 
And I present another petition from Moose Jaw -- many more signatures from 
businesses, from the people of Moose Jaw, of all walks of life and all 
areas of the city, the same prayer regarding the goods and services tax.  
And I've signed this petition and I'm pleased to present it to the 
Assembly. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I present a petition from another area of the 



 

 

province.  It is on the same topic: the goods and services tax.  And this 
one petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the town of Estevan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who represents that? 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Represented by the Premier of the province, but I'm pleased 
to present this petition on behalf of the people in Estevan.  There's 
someone here who comes . . . and lives on 1st Street in Estevan, 2nd Street 
in Estevan, and all the others are just signed Estevan.  The people of 
Estevan, on behalf of them, I present this petition to the Assembly.  I've 
signed it and I'm pleased to present it because of their concern about the 
goods and services tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is another petition from the town of Estevan -- more 
people who are unhappy about the goods and services tax, provincial tax . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Next member. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Speaker.  I 
appreciate the opportunity to rise pursuant to rule 11 of the Legislative 
Assembly -- the only avenue that we have in Saskatchewan for the people of 
Saskatchewan to directly communicate concerns to the Legislative Assembly, 
through rule 11, which sets out the parameters of how people may do that. 
 
The petitions I have all have the same preamble and the same prayer, Mr. 
Speaker.  These people are taking the position that the government does not 
have a mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to impose a major tax 
increase which would result from the proposed provincial goods and services 
tax or provincial sales tax or what is now the education and health tax.  
And it is for that reason that they're petitioning the Legislative 
Assembly, and in particular they're saying: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
(and they're asking us as members of the Legislative Assembly to urge the 
government to stop the provincial GST) until the people of the province 
have had an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial election.  
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
So in a sense, or to put it plainly, they'd like to see this tax stopped 
until they've had an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this petition that I have before me, from people of Saskatchewan, there 
are 19 signatures here, sir.  And these people come from the constituencies 
of the cities of Melville; the town of Ituna; Cupar, Saskatchewan; Goodeve, 
Saskatchewan; more from Ituna; more from Melville.  Here's a couple here 
from Balcarres, and one person from Hubbard, Saskatchewan.  I believe most 
of these are in the constituency of Melville, Mr. Speaker, and I'll be 
pleased to present this to the page. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the members opposite are really excited to hear 



 

 

these petitions, but again it's the only opportunity that people have to 
make their views known.  I have a further . . . I believe in this case it's 
19 signatures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are from Melville, Saskatchewan, and again there's a couple more here 
from Balcarres, Saskatchewan.  And if my sense of geography is correct, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that also is in the constituency of Melville.  And I'm 
pleased to present this petition for the people of Melville and area to the 
members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I might say as an aside, I wish I had the opportunity, as I do in debate, 
to react to heckles from the government members, Mr. Speaker, but I'm 
mindful that petitions should not engender debate. 
 
I have some more signatures, Mr. Speaker, 20 in total.  These are also from 
the eastern part of the province.  They're from the communities of 
Balcarres, Fort Qu'Appelle, which I know well; Grayson, Saskatchewan; 
Neudorf, Saskatchewan, which I had the pleasure of visiting not so many 
months ago; Melville. Again more signatures from Neudorf; and Goodeve, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And it's also my pleasure to present these to 
the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these people in that 
part of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another 19 names and signatures here, as per the 
prescribed format for the presenting of petitions.  It would appear that 
all these signatures and names are from the city of Moose Jaw.  Some are in 
the trailer court in Moose Jaw.  And there's one here . . . or a couple 
here from Saskatoon as well; I suppose they were visiting Moose Jaw. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Shopping. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well I'm not sure if they came down for the shopping, 
why they were there.  But in any event, Mr. Speaker, most of these are from 
Moose Jaw, a couple here from Saskatoon, that I'd like to present to the 
Legislative Assembly.  If I might ask the page to come forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I have some more signatures here, not 
quite 20, which is the normal number on a sheet, but something less than 
that.  But nevertheless, again it appears to be people from Moose Jaw and 
area -- from Montgomery Street, Duffield Street.  Oh no, here's one from 
Massey Road in Regina.  Mr. Speaker, there's one from Gravelbourg, 
Saskatchewan, a community that I know well and like a lot.  Some more here 
from Fairford Street, Ominica Street West in Moose Jaw.  Again primarily 
from the Moose Jaw area where people have been very active in making their 
views known, Mr. Speaker.  And I'd like to present this to the page if I 
might. 
 
Again we have more here from . . . names from Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker.  Plus one from Gravelbourg.  And I see here one from Eyebrow, 
Saskatchewan.  But also one from Nanaimo, B.C.  And I don't know if that's 
going to invalidate the petition, but there are at least 19 other 



 

 

signatures and names here from Saskatchewan residents, and as I stated from 
the cities of Moose Jaw, communities of Gravelbourg and Eyebrow, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would just say, Mr. Speaker, that I've signed all of these forms in 
accordance with your direction and the rules of rule 11 which governs the 
tabling of these petitions in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, the House stands recessed until 
7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


