





























































Hansard: May 22, 1991


 

 

May 22/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Legislative Assembly on behalf of many residents 
of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners are urging the provincial government to reverse its 
decision to impose the 7 per cent provincial GST (goods and services tax).  
Mr. Speaker, if I might, I'd like to read the prayer at the beginning: 
 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Legislature 
assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the Province of Saskatchewan 
humbly Sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from the communities of 
Bienfait in Estevan, for the Premier's riding.  It is my honour to present 
to this Assembly this petition this afternoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have other petitioners who are wishing and 
praying the same, Mr. Speaker.  They are from the communities of Pilot 
Butte, from Lumsden, from Estlin, and from the neighbourhoods in Regina of 
Whitmore Park, Albert Park, and Coronation Park.  Mr. Speaker, these 
residents are both from the city and from rural communities and they have 
asked us to present this petition on their behalf opposing the GST, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to introduce some guests in 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member has sought leave to introduce guests.  As I 



 

 

look into the galleries, we have a good number of guests, and perhaps I 
could, on behalf of members, ask for leave of all members who wish to 
introduce guests.  Thank you. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I have two groups I'd like to introduce to 
you today, and through you to all members of the House.  They are both in 
your Speaker's gallery, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, let me introduce the 
school children, Mr. Speaker.  They are from Douglas Park School, grades 5 
and 6, 22 of them, Mr. Speaker up in your gallery on the west side of the 
Speaker's gallery.  Their teacher is Patty Cherepuschak; chaperons, Joanne 
Reitmeier, Bob Fry, and Linda Thorseth. 
 
I'll have an opportunity to speak with them in a little while at 2:30, have 
our picture taken, and speak with them and discuss what is going on in the 
House here today.  Please welcome the students from Douglas Park School. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- An, Mr. Speaker, also on the ongoing process to inform 
government employees on the activities in the Legislative Building, we have 
today in your gallery, 22 public service people, professionals with the 
Public Service Commission in the province; eight from Department of 
Highways and Transportation; five from Finance; two from Rural Development; 
five from Social Services; and five from SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), Mr. Speaker. 
 
They've had an opportunity during the last hour or so to be informed on the 
business of the Legislative Assembly, as well as what goes on in the 
Legislative Assembly outside this house, and also have a tour of this 
wonderful building that we have.  It's a wonderful opportunity for them to 
become more informed of what the government process is, other than just 
their own department. 
 
So please welcome all members, our professionals from the Public Service 
Commission in your Speaker's gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join my colleague across 
the floor in welcoming these professional civil servants to the proceedings 
of the Legislative Assembly here in Saskatchewan.  It is my hope that you 
enjoy the proceedings today as you witness democracy at its finest. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce to you 
and to members of the Assembly 60 grade 7 and 8 students from Vincent 
Massey School in Saskatoon.  They're seated in the west gallery behind me, 
Mr. Speaker.  They're accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Tad Cherkewich and 



 

 

MR. Morris Sulatyski. 
 
And I'll be . . . anyway, I'll be apologizing for the pronunciation of the 
name and meeting them for drinks after the session is over.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the legislature, Eloise 
Opheim, who has been instrumental and a major force in PRIDE (Parent 
Resources Institute for Drug Education Inc.) Canada, not only in 
Saskatchewan but across the nation.  She's seated in your gallery. 
 
She's been instrumental in helping an awful lot of young people deal with 
various kinds of substance abuse, and she has been an inspiration to people 
from coast-to-coast and internationally.  And I'd like to have all members 
welcome her here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to welcome 
Eloise Opheim to the legislature.  Eloise has spent a good deal of time in 
the city of Saskatoon and across the county, working on behalf of young 
people and their families who are faced with a very real problem of drug 
and alcohol addition.  Eloise's work has been recognized in our city when 
she was named YWCA woman of the year.   As well, her work has been 
recognized nationally. 
 
And I know that our leader has had some involvement with PRIDE Canada and 
the work that they're doing.  So I, along with my colleagues, want to 
welcome you to the legislature and wish you all the best as you work on 
behalf of Saskatchewan and Canada's young people. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly, two guests that we 
have with us this afternoon.  I would ask them to stand -- they're in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker -- as I introduce them.  Miss Sophie Mas from 
Montpellier in France -- she's attending the University of Victoria and 
taking public administration.  And with her Mr. Richard Hick who we 
understand is originally from Regina.  He's taking political science and 
also in the University of Victoria. 
 
We want to welcome you to Saskatchewan and to Regina and especially to the 
Assembly here this afternoon.  We hope that your attendance here will be 
educational, informative.  And we understand also that they are holidaying 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I'd ask all members to please welcome these two guests to our Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 



 

 

Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Pursuant to rule 11, I continue my 
right in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to present on behalf of many residents 
of the province of Saskatchewan a petition opposing the implementation of 
the provincial GST prior to the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have further names from the community of Estevan and from 
the Premier's home constituency of Estevan, who have asked me on their 
behalf to present this petition in opposition to the tax.  I present it on 
the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have further residents of Saskatchewan from 
the communities of Hanley, located in the Arm River constituency I believe; 
and Martensville which I believe is in Rosthern; and residents of 
Saskatoon.  These residents both from rural districts and urban districts 
are uniting in opposition to this tax, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure on 
their behalf to present the petition to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with many names on it 
from the constituency of Regina North West, which I represent, and the 
neighbourhoods of Maple Ridge and Normanview specifically in that riding, 
as well as from the community in the neighbourhood of Glencairn in North 
East Regina and many residents from central Regina as well.  I present this 
petition to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have further names to table in this Assembly 
on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan.  These citizens, Mr. Speaker, as 
well are from the Premier's home constituency located in the city of 
Estevan, and the community of Bienfait.  It is my honour, Mr. Speaker, and 
privilege, on their behalf, to present to this Assembly the names on these 
petitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition requesting the same as the previous 
petitions.  These citizens are from again the constituency of Regina North 
West and the neighbourhoods of Normanview, Sherwood Estates, and Lakeridge, 
which are located in the north west part of the city of Regina.  It is my 
privilege on behalf of my constituents to table this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have further names to present to this 
Assembly.  These people reside in the communities of Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, 
and Regina -- and pretty well all neighbourhoods of Saskatoon.  They are 
joining, Mr. Speaker, again in unity and opposition to this tax, both from 



 

 

south-central and north-central Saskatchewan.  I present this petition to 
the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have petitioners who have signed this 
petition -- people who are living in the communities of Alvena, Wakaw, 
Hagen, Saskatchewan, Bellevue, and St. Louis.  All of these residents, Mr. 
Speaker, reside in constituencies outside of the urban districts, and they 
are uniting, Mr. Speaker, with those in the cities in opposing this tax.  
It is my honour and privilege to present on their behalf, to you and to 
this Assembly, their petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
 DMr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with signatures on 
it from communities . . . residents who reside in communities of Central 
Butte, which is in the constituency of Thunder Creek, Minister of Energy's 
riding.  I have citizens who have signed this petition who are from 
Dundurn, who I believe are in the minister from Rosthern's constituency, as 
well as many residents, Mr. Speaker, who reside in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Once again, these people living in agricultural districts and in the city 
of Saskatoon have united in opposition to this tax and have asked me to 
present it on their behalf.  I do so, Mr. Speaker, with honour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with a number of names 
on it.  These citizens of Saskatchewan oppose this tax.  They are from the 
communities of St. Louis, from the community of Cudworth, from Hoey, from 
Vonda, from Bellevue, from Domremy, and from the city of Prince Albert.  
Again, Mr. Speaker, citizens united both from rural districts and urban 
districts wishing to indicate to this government that they do not want this 
tax passed until they have an opportunity to pass judgement. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order.  I have been listening 
to the hon. member and, as on previous days, I have requested that members 
not repeat or make constant references to the prayer.  Refer to it once; 
present your petitions. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate your ruling.  Mr. 
Speaker, I have another petition from citizens from around the province 
who've asked me to make this presentation to the Assembly.  These people 
live in the community of Birch Hills, in the community of Wakaw, and again, 
Mr. Speaker, in the community of Domremy.  And it's my honour, Mr. Speaker, 
on their behalf, to present to you and lay on the Table their petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from residents in Saskatchewan.  These 
people, Mr. Speaker, reside in the communities of Macoun and Estevan, which 
are located in the Premier's riding, Mr. Speaker.  They have asked the 
opposition to present on their behalf their signatures to this Assembly in 
opposition to the tax. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from citizens in Saskatchewan who 
reside in the communities of Batoch, St. Benedict, from Middle Lake, from 
Hoey, from Wakaw, and from the city of Prince Albert.  Again, Mr. Speaker, 
rural and urban constituents and residents in this province uniting and 
requesting that they have their signatures made public in this Assembly. 
 
I have other citizens, Mr. Speaker, who have signed a petition.  They 
reside in the communities of St. Louis, Domremy, Bellevue, and the city of 
Saskatoon.  Once again, Mr. Speaker -- urban and rural residents uniting on 
the same petition and asking us to present it to the Assembly, and I do so 
with honour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a further petition from residents who 
reside in Torquay, Saskatchewan, and in Estevan.  Both of these communities 
are in the Premier's constituency.  They have asked the opposition to 
present this petition on their behalf and I am honoured and privileged to 
do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that is signed by a number of 
residents in Saskatchewan.  These people, Mr. Speaker, reside in Lampman, 
which is in the Estevan constituency, in the city of Estevan, and the city 
of Moose Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, these residents, both in the Premier's riding 
and nearby have united again and asked us to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by a number of residents . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a motion that the 
House now proceed to the daily oral question period. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Another member has the floor at this time 
and I am unable to recognize you at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition to present on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan to this Assembly.  These citizens, Mr. 
Speaker, reside in the communities of Bienfait and Estevan.  Mr. Speaker, 
these residents reside in the Premier's constituency and they have asked us 
to present on their behalf the petition which is now done, sir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition on behalf of many constituents in 
Saskatchewan and many residents.  They reside in the community of Wilkie, 
in the community of Waldheim, Saskatchewan; in Stewart Valley, and in the 
city of Saskatoon.  Mr. Speaker, these residents are residing in both urban 
and rural districts of this province, and are uniting in requesting us to 
present on their behalf this petition in opposition to the tax. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by many 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan.  These people reside, Mr. 
Speaker, in the constituency of Estevan which is the Premier's 
constituency.  They have requested that their names go on record in this 
Assembly in opposition to this tax.  It's my honour, Mr. Speaker, to 
present on their behalf this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition to present to this 
Assembly that is signed by many residents.  These people reside in the 
communities of St. Louis, Saskatchewan; in Prince Albert, in La Ronge, and 
other districts around the city of Prince Albert.  Mr. Speaker, they again 
are uniting both in the North and in the rural areas in this province in 
requesting that we present this petition on their behalf.  It is my honour 
to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege to present to you another petition which 
is signed by many residents of the people of Saskatchewan who reside in 
Saskatchewan.  These people live in Prince Albert, and districts 
surrounding Prince Albert like Shellbrook and Crutwell, Mr. Speaker.  Again 
they are uniting, both urban and rural, in requesting us to get this 
petition tabled in this Assembly.  It is my honour, Mr. Speaker, to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which is signed by 
many individuals, or I should say some individuals, and these people reside 
in the city of Regina.  It is my duty, Mr. Speaker, and my honour, to 
present on their behalf this petition to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which is signed by 
residents of the people of this province.  These individuals reside in the 
city of Regina as well as in the community of Milestone, and the city of 
Regina, is basically the east end and the central part of the city of 
Regina.  Again, Mr. Speaker, urban dwellers and rural dwellers uniting in 
signing this petition, and I'm presenting it on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member on his feet?  Order, order, order.  
Order.  Order.  Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order, please. 
 
The Speaker: -- What is your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I have done considerable research with 
respect to what has been happening in this legislature for the past number 



 

 

of days, and on the issue of petitions, I would like to refer to 
Beauchesne's 6th Edition of Parliamentary Rules and Forms, item no. 346.  
And what that states, Mr. Speaker, is that: 
 

 The use of dilatory tactics during Routine Proceedings can be an abuse, 
and the Speaker may, after consideration of the specific circumstances, 
permit motions which would end such an abuse. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak to you on some justifications on 
why I believe that it has been clearly shown and demonstrated to this 
Assembly that we have gone beyond the normal cases of rights and 
privileges, crossed that line to a situation of abuse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To recap these in short order for you, Mr. Speaker, I must say that the 
government, and I, as House Leader, in my humble view, Mr. Speaker, have 
shown considerable latitude.  And I believe this House has shown 
considerable latitude and patience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'm going to ask hon. members to 
co-operate.  The Government House Leader is raising a point of order.  No 
doubt the Opposition House Leader or perhaps other members may wish to 
speak to it, and perhaps some other government members as well.  So I think 
that we should give him the opportunity to present his point of order and 
co-operate so that each individual has that courtesy offered to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to state my 
case with respect to this issue.  As I was stating, Mr. Speaker, I feel 
that this Assembly has shown great latitude to members opposite in allowing 
them to present petitions, in allowing them their rights to speak.  And I 
will recap some of the events, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week we had a member report on a standard committee report from a 
committee called Public Accounts.  The rules according to Beauchesne's 
parliamentary guide would say that it is the custom for a member to give a 
succinct report when it refers to reports from committees.  This House 
allowed the member opposite an entire sitting day on a unanimous report.  I 
believe that showed patience, that showed latitude, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have allowed members across the floor to present petitions and we still 
do, Mr. Speaker.  Only the format is at question, Mr. Speaker.  I believe 
that this Assembly has shown again great latitude in allowing members to 
give petitions one page at a time, sometimes one name at a time, sometimes 
allowing some debate, sometimes allowing time to even sign the petition. 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that that has gone beyond the case of a right or a 
privilege and crossed the line to clear abuse or obstruction. 
 
We have seen members opposite, contrary to the traditions of any 
parliament, ring bells to adjourn the Assembly before any concrete business 
has been conducted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members at large in Saskatchewan, members of the media, don't 



 

 

know from day to day whether there will be question period or whether there 
will not be a question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan does not have confidence today 
whether or not actual government business will be conducted in this 
institution.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is contrary to the intent 
and the rules and the practices of this Assembly. 
 
When the rules of our own Saskatchewan legislature were made, Mr. Speaker, 
they talked about question period starting no later than five minutes after 
the beginning of the day and not to extend any more than 25 minutes later.  
I'd say, Mr. Speaker, the people that designed these rules never had the 
intention of the type of abuse that we have seen from members opposite. 
 DMr. Speaker, there have been plenty of instances where at times the 
Speaker of Parliament or the Speaker of a Legislative Assembly must face 
some responsibilities with respect to stopping an impasse of a Legislative 
Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, and I could quote to you at length but I will just 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is plenty of precedent in the House of 
Commons, precedent even in the Ontario legislature just last week where the 
Speaker ruled indeed we will go right to question period because normal 
business of the day has been obstructed. 
 
I'd ask you, Mr. Speaker, to take all of those points into consideration on 
this point of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to speak in 
response to the point of order made to the Assembly by the Government House 
Leader.  In his comments he stated that the government has allowed -- and I 
want to stress the point "allowed" -- the members of the opposition to 
present petitions. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, the height of arrogance is a government with a majority 
saying that they are allowing the opposition to present petitions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's clear to members of the opposition 
and the public that if the government had their way they would not be 
allowing petitions to be presented here -- would not be allowed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, nor would they allow debate on Bill 61.  
They wouldn't allow it at all because the Government House Leader indicated 
to the press after only two hours of debate that he was considering closure 
on the debate on the Bill.  So he wouldn't allow debate on the Bill. 
 
They will not allow the Crown Corporations Committee to meet.  We have 
exchanged a number of letters, a number of letters with this government, 
asking and arguing that Crown Corporations be allowed to sit.  They won't 
allow it. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, after the 1989 debate on SaskEnergy, that minister who now 
complains about the rules of the Assembly, met a number of times with 
members of our caucus in the Rules Committee.  Proposals were made for rule 
changes.  Some of them would have benefitted his caucus; some of them may 
have benefitted our caucus.  But the main point was that I believe they 
would have benefitted the public. 
 
And what did they do?  What did that minister do when he had an opportunity 
to amend the rules to make them better for the public, as he says?  What he 
did, he ran and hid and did not have hearings around the province, as was 
proposed and agreed by members of the committee.  That's what he did. 
 
But now that the rules aren't working to the benefit of the government, 
what does he say?  Now he says, we're going to change the rules in the 
middle of the game. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that is another example of why the people of the 
province reject this government and are calling for an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, we have called on this government to make 
amendments that would make democracy work better in the province and better 
in the Assembly.  We tabled last week or the week before what we have given 
to the public in terms of a democratic reform paper called Democratic 
Reform for the 1990's.  Not one ounce of support or recognition from the 
government. 
 
But today, when they're trying to jam through Bill 61, the only thing 
that's being held up here . . . and I indicate that to the Government House 
Leader every day in a letter that we're willing to go on to any other 
business, be it GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan), be it NISA (net income 
stabilization account), be it the leafcutter bee Bill, or be it any of the 
estimates that are before the House, we're willing to go to that business. 
 
What we're saying to the minister is that you can't jam through a tax Bill 
of this magnitude -- in the area of half a billion dollars -- without the 
proper debate.  That is improper.  That's an abuse of power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The minister indicates that he doesn't know whether 
we're going to go to question period or not.  Well isn't that too bad. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, for nine years we have waited for an agenda 
for the Assembly for the opposition.  And we've asked for an agenda.  And 
we have yet to get an agenda for the business of the Assembly on one single 
day from you as Government House Leader -- not one day.  We come here every 
day without an agenda, every day.  And some days you tell us outside of the 
House you're going to deal with this Bill and that Bill, and we come in the 
House and you say, surprise, we're going to deal with estimates.  And you 
do this day after day. 



 

 

 
But today in the middle of presentation of petitions, when only one of our 
members has presented petitions, when in fact every member has the right, 
they're not being allowed.  But we have the right to present petitions, 
every one of us.  And you say we can't do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, and I want to ask, 
Mr. Speaker, that we intend to present petitions, not because we want to 
but because people are bringing them to us to present on their behalf. 
 
The rules are clear.  And I want to take a moment to read from page 6 of 
the rules of this Assembly by which we live and rule the workings of the 
House.  Rule 11, which deals with petitions, and it says: 
 

 11(1) A petition to the Assembly may be presented by a Member at any time 
during the sitting of the Assembly by filing the same with the Clerk. 

 
 (2) Any member desiring to present a petition must do so during Routine 

Proceedings and before introduction of Bills. 
 

And that's what we're doing.  And we intend to continue to present. 
 
Now when you rise on a point of moving a motion in the presentation of 
petitions, I want to refer to a ruling made on Friday, June 9, 1989, and in 
a statement by the Speaker . . .  
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  That motion was not accepted because you 
didn't have the floor and that was not part of the point of order. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I want to talk about the motion that is being considered 
by the members. 
 
The Speaker: -- You must relate it to the point of order.  And I have given 
you plenty of time to speak and I intend to give you a bit more time but 
I'm also asking you to wrap up your remarks.  Then maybe some other members 
will also wish to make remarks. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- In this statement by the Speaker, and I want to take 
just a moment to read it.  The Speaker said at that time: 
 

 For the clarification of the Assembly, I want to make a statement 
regarding one of the proceedings which took place earlier today. 

 
 Before orders of the day, the member for Regina Elphinstone move that the 

next item of business be Bill 41.  The motion was allowed to be put, 
without leave, on the grounds that it is a superseding motion which does 
not require leave. 

 
The Speaker goes on to say: 
 

 Upon further reflection, I wish to make a clarification regarding the 



 

 

future application of this procedure . . . (which we're now looking at 
today). 

 
 The purpose of a superseding motion is to set aside or supersede a 

question which is then under debate.  In this regard, I refer members to 
the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly as follows, rule 10: 

 
  A motion for reading of Orders of the Day shall have preference over 

any motion before the Assembly. 
 

An Hon. Member: -- Repeat that please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I repeat again, rule 10 says: 
 

 A motion for the reading of Orders of the Day (that's where we're at now 
on petitions) shall have preference over any motion before the Assembly. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, rule 41 in your ruling says that: 
 

 When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received unless to 
amend it; to postpone it to a day certain for the previous questions; for 
reading the Orders of the Day; for proceeding to another order; to adjourn 
debate; or for the adjournment of the Assembly. 

 
You go on to say: 
 

 I further refer members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 
Fifth Edition, citation 417(2)(b) as follows: 

 
  Superseding motions, though independent in form, are moved in the 

course of debate on questions which they seek to set aside.  They may 
only be moved when a question is under debate . . . 

 
 Our rules of the authorities are clear that there must be come business 

before the House in order for a superseding motion to be in order.  The 
motion moved earlier today was moved on orders of the day when there was 
no question before the House. 

 
 I therefore wish members to understand that in future a superseding motion 

such as the one moved earlier today can only be put when the House is in 
the midst of debating a motion. 

 
So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, on these points, first of all, the idea that 
we should be stalled from presenting petitions is an abuse by a government, 
an attempt to abuse the rules of the Assembly.  We had one member 
presenting petitions today.  At that point the Government House Leader 
rises to put a stop to that.  I say that is abuse and I say that is why the 
people of Saskatchewan believe this government to be undemocratic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of order, I think 
the reason that we are here in this House or at any time in the history of 
this province is we're here because of the people of the province.  We're 
here on the best interests of the people of the province.  So, Mr. Speaker, 
I ask myself as I sit here and listen day after day to what's going on, if 
we are really doing the people's business.  And no one in this House on 
either side of the House would ever deny anybody the right to speak, 
particularly in this setting.  No one would ever deny that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the right to speak in a democratic setting like a Legislative 
Assembly has been fought over many centuries and has been achieved over 
many centuries, and it's something that we protect.  You know, Mr. Speaker, 
when you stand here and you try to speak and you hear the shouts and the 
gibes and the criticisms and the put-downs from either side of the House, 
you begin to wonder, is it really worthwhile to spend your time trying to 
make a difference in this province, trying to do something worthwhile. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House have been particularly 
patient, very patient.  We've listened to their petitions day after day, 
listened to the different type of obstructionist methods that they've used.  
So I think what we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is find a balance.  We need to 
find a balance between oppression of the minority and obstruction of the 
majority, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that it's time, it's time that we as 
members in this House, elected by the people of this province, got down to 
the business of doing the government's business, and let's get on with it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to deal with 
what I think is the gravamen of the House Leader's complaint, and that is 
that we are abusing the procedures of the House. 
 
I think it's worthwhile, Mr. Speaker, to ask oneself, what is the 
legislature?  What function does it serve? 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the legislature is first and foremost an 
opportunity for public opinion to be brought to bear on the government 
business.  It is not necessarily determinant of the government business, 
but this is what the legislature is here for, so that public opinion may be 
brought to bear on the issues of the day as the government brings them 
forward. 
 
The only reason why petitions are being presented in the number they are is 
because the government will not give the opposition that opportunity.  
Three people spoke; no one asked for an adjournment.  The longest speech 
was a little over two hours, two hours and 15 minutes.  At the end of that, 
they moved closure and cut the debate off. 
 
There is no abuse of the procedure of the House, Mr. Speaker, except by the 
government in introducing closure.  That's the real abuse of this 
legislature. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I don't wish to presume upon whatever motives Mr. 
Speaker might act out of, but I say to Mr. Speaker, if you allow the motion 
which the Government House Leader wants to put forward, what you're going 
to be doing is saying that the government's agenda -- and some who are 
crass would say it's a government's election agenda -- takes precedence 
over the function of this House, which is to bring public opinion to bear 
on the issues of the day.  That's going to be the effect of acceding to 
that motion. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, everyone had spoken and were speaking a second time under 
a tabling motion or something else, that would be different.  But it just 
simply didn't happen.  We're not at that stage yet. 
 
We're at the stage where I have spoken, two others have spoken, and that's 
it.  And other members of the House who are elected by the constituents to 
come here and bring the point of view of their constituents forward has 
been denied.  And that's why these petitions are coming forward. These 
petitions are not an abuse of the House.  They are simply the only means 
that is left to give vent to public frustration with an act of the 
government with which they vehemently, and I may say unanimously almost, 
disagree. 
 
So we're not abusing it, Mr. Speaker.  We are not abusing the rules of this 
House.  It is the Government House Leader in the premature use of closure 
which has abused this said legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the motion that I 
attempted to move, I must say, Mr. Speaker, that that motion at that 
particular moment was certainly not meant to interrupt the member opposite.  
And I would certainly just seek an opportunity yet in the day to move that 
motion.  I only speak, Mr. Speaker, to the issue of the abuse that we have 
seen over the last five or six days.  And at that time, Mr. Speaker, if 
given the opportunity, I would intend to move that motion that we do move 
to question period and I would at that time like to advance my arguments on 
why that motion would be in order.  But I will await your ruling on this 
particular point of order. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity 
to speak on the point of order which is before the House at this time. 
 
The member for Regina Elphinstone stated quite clearly in reading from rule 
no. 11, the two conditions that govern the laying of petitions on the 
Table.  And the first one says, may -- the members "may" do it in this 
fashion.  the second one says, the members "must" lay the petition, present 
the petition "during Routine Proceedings and before Introduction of Bills."  
I think that's quite clear, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure you're aware of that 
as I am. 



 

 

 
I want to make further reference to extend the point of order that's raised 
by the member for Regina Elphinstone and refer to Beauchesne's 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 5th Edition, on page 209, section 16, 
dealing with petitions, Mr. Speaker.  The first heading after petitions is 
"Right to Petition," citation no. 666: 
 

 The right of petitioning the Crown and Parliament for redress of 
grievances is acknowledged as a fundamental principle of the constitution 
and has been exercised without interruption since 1867. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you will recognize that date as being the creation of Canada.  
These rules, Beauchesne's of the House of Commons, which act as a back-up 
to the rules of this Assembly quite clearly state, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
fundamental principle since Canada was formed.  That is quite clear. 
 
I think what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is the clear intention of the 
government spoken in this House and outside of this House and evident on 
the order paper.  Their intention is to severely foreshorten the debate and 
terminate the debate on the particular issue of Bill 61. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think you in your generosity will recognize the purpose 
of the petitions is to hear the voice of the people -- something this very 
government is calling for by way of plebiscites, etc.  They're calling for 
it, Mr. Speaker.  We have the public's voice here.  We're presenting it to 
the Chamber.  I think we cannot be deterred from presenting the voice of 
the people from all over Saskatchewan on this particular issue. 
 
And the member for Melfort seeks to take the right away from this Assembly, 
which is recognized in this Assembly since 1904 and recognized in the House 
of Commons of Canada since the creation of Canada in 1867.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I'll await your decision on that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, to the point of order, I don't think that it will escape your 
attention or that of the public that the debate which has been going on in 
the Legislative Assembly now for a week or two is a debate of major 
historic proportions. 
 
It's a great debate.  It's an historic debate about a government that wants 
to impose a tax.  Now the government has proposed to shut off debate on 
that motion after only a limited period of time, notwithstanding the major 
impact of the tax, which is recognized by all sides. 
 
Now we have the government moving further to shut off an avenue of the 
public to put forward its views on the proposed tax of the government, 
which is what we have been doing. 
 
It seems to me that we would not be serving the public well if we are to 
peremptorily cut off further opportunities for the public to put its views 
forward by shutting down the opportunities to present petitions here in the 



 

 

Legislative Assembly.  And again I want you to put that in the context of 
the great and historic debate that we are engaged in, which is what it is, 
that we should not shut off the opportunities for the public, for their 
voice to be heard in this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that history will judge you to have made the right 
decisions if you make the decision on behalf of the public to allow members 
to continue to put petitions before the Legislative Assembly so that the 
proportion and the significance of their opposition to this tax Bill can be 
heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might say in the final analysis that I don't think that the 
public or anyone in Saskatchewan would look very favourably upon an 
opposition using methods of obstruction, using methods to slow up the 
proceedings and the workings of the Legislative Assembly if there were not 
significant public support for the actions of the opposition, or the 
members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I feel that in this case there is significant public support for the 
opposition to be presenting petitions in this case.  And putting that into 
context of the major tax grab that's before us, I ask you to look 
favourably upon the people being allowed an opportunity to continue to put 
their voice forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak very briefly and 
strictly to the point of order that was raised by the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reference is made by the Government House Leader for you 
to intervene in a non-routine way into the ordinary business of the House.  
He makes reference to Beauchesne's and to rulings of the House of Commons.  
And I presume, Mr. Speaker, that the Government House Leader is referring 
to general rule no. 1 which says: 
 

 In all cases not provided for in these Rules or by sessional or other 
orders, the usages and customs of the House of Commons of Canada as in 
force at the time, shall be followed, so far as they may be applicable to 
the Assembly. 

 
It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that the nub of your ruling and the nub as 
to the governance of the rules of conduct of this House rely or revolve 
around that particular issue, whether or not there exists rules in this 
House which govern the ordinary routine proceedings of the House and 
whether or not the presenting of petitions in the manner that we have been 
doing fall within those rulings. 
 
And I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that under rule 8(2) of the proceedings 
that the business of the Assembly shall be the presenting . . . first item 
of business, according to rule 8(2) is: "The ordinary daily routine 
proceedings in the Assembly shall be as follows: (the question of) 
Presenting Petitions." 



 

 

 
Within the context of that rule 8(2) and in reference to the method in 
which those petitions are to be presented, rule no. 11(2) is quite 
explicit, Mr. Speaker.  It says that: 
 

 Any Member desiring to present a petition must do so during Routine 
Proceedings and before Introduction of Bills. 

 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker . . . it would appear to me that in my opinion 
and in the opinion of the members of this side of the House, that the 
procedure for presenting petitions is very clear, that the rule of the 
House there is no leeway for any other interpretation other than that laid 
out by general rule no. 1 which says that where there is not a common 
custom or where there are no rules laid down, the House of Commons is to be 
followed. 
 
It's our contention that the rules however of this House are extremely 
clear on that -- that rule 8(2) says the first item of business shall be 
presenting petitions, and that within that context of rule 8(2) any member 
of this legislature must, before orders of the day, rise during this item 
of business as laid out in the standing orders of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
 DSo I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. House Leader does not have a 
point of order; that in fact the standing rules of this legislature are in 
force and effect under rule 8(2) and under rule 11(2) as well.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to speak on the point of order, and I 
will deal with both the process and the substance of the point of order.  
It's my viewpoint as a member from Cumberland which is northern 
Saskatchewan, I think it's very important for me to stand here in this 
legislature to make sure that the voices of the people are heard through 
the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the past nine years their voices have not been heard too 
often.  And the last time when I was up in northern Saskatchewan this past 
week, they said make sure you tell the Premier and you tell the people, the 
government, that indeed what they are doing is wrong; that indeed we want 
to be able to make our voices known through the petition. 
 
And the petition takes a bit more time in regards to getting here than most 
other communities, Mr. Speaker.  It takes an extra week for mail to come 
from the different communities in northern Saskatchewan than from other 
communities.  You will notice most of the mail from the different 
communities, except for the main ones, will arrive here, but the smaller 
communities take a bit more time. 
 
So I would say that on behalf of my own constituency, I would like to have 
the opportunity to present the petitions and make sure that the voices of 
people from northern Saskatchewan are heard. 
 
The minister from across mentions that we tried to stop the House from 
going forward, but I think that's wrong.  I haven't had the time to speak, 
Mr. Speaker.  I haven't spoken on the debate in this House yet.  I wanted 



 

 

to speak.  I did some research in regards to the history of taxation, in 
regards to the whole issue as it relates to the PST.  And I felt it was 
very important to present my argument, and especially how it hurts the 
people from northern Saskatchewan.  And I wanted to present these, but I 
can't any more because now they're going to put the closure motion.  I 
think it's highly undemocratic for the government to present the closure 
motion at this stage of the game.  We haven't even been heard. 
 
And now the last straw.  We thought that at least we could present the 
petition, and now after only one person speaking today in presenting a 
petition, the government says we can't go ahead and do it.  I'm waiting 
here today to present my petitions, and I hope that the point of order is 
not well taken that has been raised by the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to bring to your 
attention again, Mr. Speaker, the point of order that was raised by our 
House Leader.  And as I lead up to this point of order, I would like to 
point out that again, as I was speaking at a luncheon to some of my 
constituents and some of their constituents opposite, the question of the 
day again, Mr. Speaker, was why I as a member for Regina was not able to 
carry forward the viewpoint in this Assembly with freedom of speech, and 
the delay tactics that have been taken by the members of the opposition. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, everybody in this province is aware of the fact that 
the Leader of the Opposition and the House Leader of the opposition party 
have both indicated publicly on not one but many occasions that they were 
out to obstruct the proceedings of this Assembly and to delay and stall as 
long as possible. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the point of order that I support is as our 
House Leader referred to, the use of dilatory tactics during routine 
proceedings can be an abuse.  And the Speaker may, after consideration of 
the specific circumstances, permit motions which would end such an abuse. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately throughout this entire Assembly since we sat 
again, we have seen delay after delay.  Some have been mentioned.  One that 
has been overlooked is the fact of the Appropriation Bill, which normally 
is done in a day, perhaps two.  And they stared way back that long ago, Mr. 
Speaker, with a six-day delay on a normal Bill. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, as I speak on behalf of the point of order, to take 
all of these delays into consideration before you make your decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to speak to 
this point of order.  Mr. Speaker, I came to this House . . . in the fall 
of 1986, I was elected, and I was elected to represent over ten thousand 
people in the riding of Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this point of order 



 

 

that it is my intention to do just that.  And by this government's actions, 
by introducing the closure motion, I say to you, Mr. Speaker that they are 
limiting my right to represent the constituents of Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
And I want to say more, Mr. Speaker.  I've found it to be a privilege to 
represent those people.  And because this government introduced the closure 
motion on Bill 61, the constituents of Prince Albert-Duck Lake and other 
areas have come forth with thousands and thousands of signatures indicating 
that they want this government to stop their move with respect to the 
provincial goods and services tax, Bill 61. 
 
(1500) 
 
And this minister, the House Leader on the government side, stands in his 
place and tells me as their representative that I cannot represent their 
views either through petition or through reflecting their ideas and their 
thoughts through a speech.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that's why I'm 
asking you to rule against this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan pay my salary on a monthly basis 
and they pay me to represent their views, as they do with every one of the 
other members of this legislature. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the right, the responsibility to present 
petitions is part of that job.  My job is to represent the people, not only 
of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, but the ideas of people throughout this 
province.  And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, if they weren't 
concerned, if they weren't concerned with, first of all, the closure 
motion, and if they weren't concerned with the largest tax grab that we 
have ever seen in the history of this province, we wouldn't be standing 
here presenting thousands and thousands of names to this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker.  That's why we're here and that's why we're fighting for our 
democratic right to represent the people of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I've indicated that this is the largest tax grab, Bill 
61, and that's what these petitions are about.  And the members on that 
side of the House clearly understand that. And speaking to this point of 
order, Mr. Speaker, it is our fundamental and basic democratic right to be 
presenting the desires of the people of this province.  And at every turn, 
this government moves to limit that debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is about democracy; this is about the future of democracy 
of the British parliamentary system in Saskatchewan.  And I say it's about 
the right to be heard and it's the right to have your feelings presented in 
this place.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this member is trying to 
circumvent the right, the process, not only by this motion, but by the 
closure motion and trying to limit the debate on this major tax grab. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm not only speaking for the member or for the residents of 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I have in my hands petitions that come from 
Saskatoon, from Regina, from Lanigan.  I see from my home community, Prince 
Albert, from Spruce Home, Henribourg, Fiske.  I mean I can go through the 
list.  It's a province-wide boycott of this tax, sir.  And I ask you, on 



 

 

behalf of the people of this province, to rule against the wishes of the 
Government House Leader and support members on this side by denying it. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to allow one or two members to speak and then I 
wish to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- And I'd like to support the point of order of my 
colleague from the constituency of Melfort, and I'd refer you to 
Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th Edition, page 278, section 
1022 where: 
 

 A petition should not be merely a remonstrance or protest, or a listing of 
grievances. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, that the petition should have substance.  It 
should clearly point out, as other sections in here point out, that a 
petition should show the way to a difference in what is being presented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think clearly what the opposition has done in this 
particular situation over a great number of days in this House is that they 
do not have any substance to add to the debate on Bill 61.  As one of the 
members from this side who stood and spoke on that particular debate on the 
harmonization of taxes within the province of Saskatchewan, I and other 
members of this caucus, particularly the Finance minister, have laid out to 
the public of this province a very clear set of plans for the future of our 
province.  It is incumbent I believe, Mr. Speaker, upon presenting 
petitions that an alternative be presented and not simply a remonstrance or 
protest. 
 
And I believe that members opposite have simply been protesting because 
they are scared to present to the people of Saskatchewan a clear 
alternative to this particular Bill, and so have been using obstructionist 
tactics that go far beyond the rights and privileges of members of this 
Assembly and go far beyond what is considered to be normal practice of this 
Assembly. 
 
And if that fear, Mr. Speaker, which obviously inhabits the members 
opposite, that they cannot present that clear alternative, then they should 
not use the rules of this House to obstruct. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too wish to address this 
point of order because this point of order, Mr. Speaker, questions in a 
very fundamental way, the right of the people of this province to express 
themselves on a very important issue which will have a very major impact on 
the lives of themselves and their families for years to come in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Surely, Mr. Speaker, it is not correct to say, as the member from Thunder 
Creek has just said, that that is frivolous on everyone who signed these 
petitions, signed them out of great concern and out of their sincere wish 
that their voice be heard and that the government would listen.  The 



 

 

members on this side of the House have listened.  We have agreed, on behalf 
of those people who have signed these petitions, to present them in this 
House so that they can be heard. 
 
For the House Leader opposite to get up today, after he announced only 
hours when the Bill was first introduced for second reading that he is 
going to interfere with that right, Mr. Speaker, should make the ruling of 
the Chair very clear.  The House Leader opposite said almost at the time he 
introduced the Bill for second reading that the government would introduce 
closure, that the government would not allow the debate to take place. 
 
In the face of that, Mr. Speaker, it is the attempt by the member opposite, 
the Hon. House Leader and his point of order which is frivolous and 
interfering with the right of the people to speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard words opposite from the members, the House Leader in 
particular on the government side, and the member from Wascana, that the 
presenting of petitions signed by the people of Saskatchewan was an 
oppression of the majority. 
 
Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the government's attempt to stop 
the presenting of petition is an oppression of the majority of Saskatchewan 
people who  
 Doppose this Bill, this 61 and this tax increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We have before this House -- and it's important to 
consider in this point of order, Mr. Speaker -- we have before this House 
legislation providing for referendums where the people have an opportunity 
to express how they feel on an issue if the Bill proceeds, if the 
government would only go ahead with it.  But when it suits the government 
which actually introduced the Bill to interfere with the right of the 
people to express by referendum or by petition, they want to stop that from 
happening.  That is wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rules as my colleagues opposite, the member from Rosemont 
and others, have pointed out, are clear.  Rule 81 -- the rules of this 
House are clear when they allow for the right of the presentation of 
petitions. 
 
But further to all of that, I want to make one final point.  And the point 
I want to make is the difficult situation which the House Leader opposite 
has put this legislature and put you, Mr. Speaker, and the Chair in by 
comments he has been making since the beginning of this session, since the 
introduction of this Bill. 
 
I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to the following quote in the Regina Leader-Post 
which was made, I believe, on Tuesday.  Yes it was.  When the House Leader 
opposite said the following.  I will read the whole two paragraphs: 
 

 For the Tories, it's been several weeks of mounting frustration.  Hodgins 
suggested Monday the Speaker might soon put an end to the delays. 



 

 

 
The member opposite, the House Leader was suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that you 
would soon put an end to the delays now, Mr. Speaker, and he went on to say 
. . . and I want to be very clear on what the member said because this is a 
direct quote: 
 

 "I believe we will have a ruling from the Speaker," Hodgins said. 
 

What is the member opposite saying, Mr. Speaker?  How can you do this now?  
How can you pass judgement and make a ruling now when the member opposite 
has put you in that kind of a position? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that clearly states what has been happening here on 
the part of the government.  What has been happening here is that they want 
to ram through a Bill which the public of Saskatchewan doesn't want, which 
deals with a major tax increase -- the biggest tax increase in the history 
of Saskatchewan -- in the very dying days of the term of this government, 
and they will try anything available to try to make that happen without the 
public having an opportunity to express how they feel. 
 
They have refused to call by-elections so that the people can speak.  They 
have refused to call a general election so that the people can speak.  Now 
we finally have a session of the legislature after it has sat, left without 
being in session for some nine months, and they still don't want to allow 
the people to speak. 
 
And as a final insult to the whole process, Mr. Speaker, the House Leader 
opposite puts you in the position which makes it impossible today for you 
to make this kind of a ruling.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I've listened to the point of order, the arguments on both 
sides of the House.  And after listening to the point and pondering it, 
I've decided that for me to rule on this point of order would do little to 
solve the impasse that this House finds itself in. 
 
I believe this issue, that of prolonging petitions, is tied to the measure 
which the House Leader indicated he's going to raise, which the member for 
Elphinstone referred to at length in his remarks. 
 
In order for me to deal with this whole issue -- and it's a much broader 
issue -- I'm going to allow the House Leader to move his motion.  Then I'm 
going to listen to points of order from both sides.  And then I will recess 
to ponder what to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I do move: 
 

 That the House now proceed to oral questions. 
 

The Speaker: -- I am now going to invite comments, and I'm serious.  This 
is an important issue.  This is an important issue.  Order.  Would the 
member for Regina North West please take his place. 



 

 

 
I'm going to, as I said earlier, I'm going to ask for further comments from 
all members on both issues -- on the point of order and . . . Order.  Hon. 
members are aware that the Chair has the right to reserve judgement on a 
point of order, and I am not required to make an instant ruling.  I have 
allowed the House Leader to move his motion.  I will allow members on both 
sides of the House to make remarks. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my point of 
order is simply that I am asking a point of order clarification.  I'm 
asking on what basis you are saying that we move off petitions. 
 
(1515) 
 
The member for . . . my colleague from Regina North West has clearly been 
presenting petitions.  Now on what basis is he being interrupted from the 
presentation of petitions so that this motion could be put forward.  What's 
the basis for you allowing that, Mr. Speaker, to occur?  Explain that to 
the House please. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Perhaps I haven't made myself clear.  We are still 
on petitions.  We are still on petitions.  I have not accepted the motion.  
I have simply recognized him and he has put his motion.  I have not 
accepted his motion. 
 
What I want from the House is as good . . . what I want from the House is 
points of view from both sides of the House on the admissibility of the 
motion.  I would like to hear that. 
 
Now we have not moved off petitions.  I have reserved my ruling on 
petitions; we are still on petitions.  I have recognized . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I have reserved my position on the point of order.  
We have not moved off petitions.  We are now on the point of order 
regarding petitions. 
 
I have allowed the hon. member, the Government House Leader, to move his 
motion.  I have not necessarily accepted the motion.  He has just made the 
statement.  And now I will accept remarks from both sides of the House on 
both issues.  Then I will reserve judgement. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's most important, 
Mr. Speaker, for the rules of this House, that we not move into an 
irregular procedure with regard to the rules at a time like this.  As 
members of the House, I'm sure we would be quite agreeable, Mr. Speaker, if 
you wish a recess to consider this matter further, because I think it's 
important on the point of order. 
 
I think it's important that if you're going to deviate and come with an 
irregular procedure, what it appears to be before the House now, that we 
should have the point of order dealt with and we're quite prepared to give 
a recess.  And if we're going to deviate to an irregular procedure, as is 
suggested by what you said, then it is important that we have a written 
ruling and citations to support that -- for your protection, Mr. Speaker, 



 

 

and for the protection of the rules of this House.  I think that's 
important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Yes, the member has made good points.  I would like to just 
once more go through the process. 
 
We had a point of order regarding the admissibility of petitions for the 
reasons you have all heard, and then counter-arguments.  I'm going to 
reserve judgement on that point of order, okay?  I recognized the member; 
he moved a superseding motion.  Now, now, now -- he moved a superseding 
motion. 
 
Now I'm going to now allow members to comment on that.  And then as the 
hon. member . . . as to the admissibility of that motion, if you wish, then 
I'm going to do as the hon. member for Saskatoon Westmount suggested and I 
will recess to consider this major issue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry, I'm confused.  I'm genuinely confused.  I've 
not seen this ever done before in the middle of a point of order -- we go 
on to something else. 
 
If Mr. Speaker is saying that in order to properly evaluate the point of 
order, you need to hear the motion that the Government House Leader is 
going to make, that's reasonable.  But if you're saying you're going to 
allow him to move it so that we are then debating . . . if it's the former, 
that you simply want to hear his motion so that you can make a decision as 
to whether or not it would be in order, that's not unreasonable. 
 
But if you're saying you're going to let him move it, which is literally 
what you said -- you're going to let him move it and somehow or other the 
point of order and the motion goes on concurrently -- that makes no sense 
at all.  You've got two unrelated items of business simultaneously before 
the House. 
 
So I would ask you what you're letting the Government House Leader do when 
he gets to his feet.  Are you allowing him to simply inform you as to what 
he's going to move?  Are you allowing him to move the motion?  If it's the 
former, that's reasonable; if it's the latter, it makes no sense to have 
two unrelated items of business in the House at the same time. 
 
The Speaker: -- The point of order on petitions has come to a conclusion.  
However I'm going to allow you to refer to it in the context of a wider 
discussion because I want a wide discussion on it. 
 
I'm going to recognize . . . if I just may go over it again.  First of all, 
I'm going to recognize the House Leader and then we'll move from there. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What's he speaking to? 
 
The Speaker: -- Well, we're going to see now.  Order, order, order. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Speaker.  And I do 
know that frustrations are running very high in this Assembly and these are 
very technical points. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I simply want to advance arguments to you as to why a 
superseding motion to move from petitions to oral question period would be 
something that would be reasonable that a Speaker should consider, given a 
member would move that in a proper manner. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Opposition House Leader has referred to previous 
times when this Assembly, and in fact you, Mr. Speaker, have ruled against 
a motion of this type.  The hon. member spoke about a movement on June 9, I 
believe, in 1989, when the Opposition House Leader tried to do exactly the 
same thing.  And, Mr. Speaker, at that time you ruled that this was out of 
order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer you to some recent events that have 
taken place in the House of Commons and actually even in the province of 
Ontario, where a Speaker has sized up the situation as it existed and in 
fact reversed decisions previously made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote to you an exception that took place in 
the House of Commons.  And, Mr. Speaker, in fact this refers to item no. 
328 in Beauchesne's parliamentary guide, where it says: 
 

 A ruling would indicate that the Speaker has some general responsibility 
for the operation of the House. 

 
  "The immediate question which faces the chair is whether the motion 

moved yesterday by the Hon. Parliamentary Secretary to the President 
of the Privy Council is acceptable or not.  I recognize that if we 
are to adhere rigidly to recent precedents, including my own ruling 
of November 24, 1986, the motion would have to be ruled unacceptable.  
The House is nevertheless facing an impasse which it has been unable 
to resolve for itself.  There comes a time when the Chair has to face 
its responsibilities.  When circumstances change and the Rules of 
Procedure provide no solution, the Chair must fall back on it 
discretion in the interests of the House and all its Members.  This 
may require . . . (and I emphasize this point, Mr. Speaker)  This may 
require the Chair to modify or vary an earlier decision." 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is very similar to the circumstances in the House of 
Commons of April 14, 1987 where the Speaker says: 
 

 It is essential to our democratic system that controversial issues should 
be debated at reasonable length . . . and that reasonable delaying tactics 
should be permissible to enable opponents of a measure to enlist public 
support for their point of view. 

 
 Rules of procedure (Mr. Speaker) protect both the minority and the 

majority.  They are designed to allow the full expression of views on both 
sides . . . (that is, government and opposition). 

 



 

 

Our rules were certainly never designed to permit the total frustration of 
one side or the other, the total stagnation of debate or the total 
paralysis of the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the practice of using dilatory motions as a means of 
obstruction is undoubtedly sanctioned by our parliamentary practice; 
however, many parliamentary jurisdictions in the Commonwealth place 
restrictions on the extent to which they can be used.  For example, in the 
British House of Commons, the Speaker has the power to refuse a dilatory 
motion if he believes it to be an abuse of the rules of the House.  No 
procedure should be sanctioned which permits the House to be brought to a 
total standstill for an indefinite period.  Division bells are no 
substitute for debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several days ago in the Legislative Assembly in the province 
of Ontario, they faced a similar situation where motions were made to move 
from the routine proceedings right to question period.  Mr. Speaker, that 
was made I believe on May 8, 1991 in the Ontario legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must conclude by saying in light of the circumstances of 
demonstrated abuses of dilatory measures by the opposition, based on the 
precedent in the House of Commons for reversals of decisions of this type, 
based on the Ontario Legislative Assembly where similar obstruction tactics 
took place, Mr. Speaker, I must say that the traditions of our Assembly 
must evolve to take into account measures such as we have seen in this 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I am speaking to whatever the Government House Leader 
was speaking to which is not at all clear to me or anyone else. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  
The member has moved his motion . . . Order, order.  Order, order, order.  
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, to clarify the . . . If the members 
opposite want to listen, I shall wait.  Mr. Speaker, to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  What is the hon. member's point or order? 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I would like to know what the Government House Leader 
is doing on his feet for the fifth time in the last hour.  This is the 
fifth time he's been on his feet.  It's the fifth time he's been on his 
feet. 
 
My point of order, Mr. Speaker, is what . . . how are you allowing the 
Government House Leader to get on his feet five times on what apparently is 
a continuation of the point of order which he raised almost an hour ago?  



 

 

So my point of order is:  what is Mr. Speaker recognizing the Government 
House Leader for? 
 
The Speaker: -- The issue is a point of order on the admissibility of the 
superseding motion.  That's the issue.  This is what's under discussion.  
This is what's under discussion and I'll give the hon. members the 
opportunity to discuss that issue. 
 
Essentially, I want to try to resolve the issue.  It's a large issue and 
this is basically what I'm trying to do here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- On the point of order that my colleague, the member 
from Regina South referred to, Mr. Speaker, I will be brief. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker -- the member from Regina Centre.  The 
hon., the House Leader on the government side has spoken several times in 
this House -- five time to be exact.  That, first of all, is highly 
irregular.  A member is allowed, Mr. Speaker, to speak to any one issue 
once unless there is another intervening motion or amendment, or some other 
measure that's taken.  But that member, the House Leader, for some strange 
reason has spoken four to five times. 
 
The House Leader spoke last and took his seat, Mr. Speaker, after you 
indicated that he could speak and there could be an exchange of views.  
After the House Leader of the government took his seat, the member from 
Regina Centre rose in his place and was recognized by the Chair, and 
therefore was prepared to speak, and therefore now has the right to speak, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is the point of order, and I think that that is the way that the rule 
applies.  And that is, therefore, the right of the member from Regina 
Centre to speak, because the House Leader had taken his seat and the member 
was recognized. 
 
The Speaker: -- Certainly I am more than willing to recognize the member 
for Regina Centre.  I am here to hear everybody's views, and there is no 
way that we want to not allow the hon. member to state his views.   So the 
member for Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Now on the 
Government House Leader's point of order, I gather is what we are 
discussing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to draw your attention to rule 345 of routine 
proceedings. 
 

 A motion to proceed to another item of business under Routine Proceedings, 
thereby by-passing the calling of other items, is inappropriate and the 
House should proceed from item to item. 

 
Section 345 -- it's fairly clear.  You cannot move a motion to proceed to 



 

 

question period or whatever it is that the Government House Leader has in 
mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that we have the right to present our petitions to 
the Legislative Assembly.  As Erskine May points out -- which at the moment 
I do not have -- but as Erskine May points out, this right has existed 
since at least the seventh century, and has not been denied. 
 
I thank my colleagues.  This right has existed since the seventh century -- 
the right to present petitions.  It isn't always part of the government's 
agenda, whatever that agenda might be.  And there are few who would be very 
charitable to the government right now about what their agenda is.  It may 
not be part of the government's agenda but the public have the right to 
present their views.  And the views of the public have simply not been 
given an adequate time to be presented. 
 
I want to pick up on the point well made by the member from Cumberland.  He 
points out that he comes from the North.  A different area geographically, 
and in many ways a different part of Saskatchewan; in some ways better, in 
some ways worse, but different.  There just has been no opportunity, given 
the communications, the mail, the petitions to be presented from his area. 
 
I say again, Mr. Speaker, it's all that's left to the public of 
Saskatchewan, given the time allocation motions.  Because the debate, for 
all purposes, when we get to orders of the day, the debate on Bill 61 is 
over.  When we get there, it's going to be over.  There's going to be no 
opportunity for the member from Cumberland to bring forth his views.  And 
that is true of other members as well. 
 
It's also true of rural areas that take longer organizationally for it to 
get there and longer to get back.  It's noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, that the 
only petitions you've heard by and large -- I shouldn't say that -- the 
majority of the petitions you've heard are from cities.  It's not because 
people in rural areas are not opposed to this.  Of course they are.  It 
just takes longer for it to get back. 
 
If you permit the Government House Leader to proceed now, you're going to 
deny a significant portion of the people of Saskatchewan the right to have 
their views brought to bear on this trough the only forum that's left, 
which is petitions. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the privileges of parliament must supersede the 
agenda of the government.  If the agenda of the government supersedes the 
rights of this legislature, then democracy rests on a very, very shaky 
footing in this province.  I don't want to be melodramatic about it, but it 
is their rights of this institution which guarantees democracy in this 
province.  If the Speaker finds that the government's agenda is more 
important than the rights of this legislature, then democracy rests on a 
very shaky ground in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, just a point to clarify what has gone on 



 

 

as it relates to the motion that the House Leader, my colleague from 
Melfort, moved.  As I understand it -- and I believe this to be the case -- 
you, as Mr. Speaker, recognizing the nature of the discussion and the 
frustration in the House on both sides, asked the House Leader to move his 
motion.  And you clearly state that you would then allow -- and in fact 
invited -- wide-ranging discussion about the appropriateness of that 
motion.  You asked him to move it; he did move it prior to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He didn't move it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- He moved it prior to making the comments about the 
motion.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to make that clear.  I want to make it 
very clear. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, a point of clarification.  The motion was moved on the 
instruction from Mr. Speaker who said, move the motion and then I will 
invite wide-ranging discussion about the appropriateness of that motion.  
And as I understand it, that's what's going on now. 
 
The Speaker: -- To try to clarify a bit further -- and I realized that we 
have a bit of confusion here this afternoon -- to try to clarify a bit 
further, my understanding was that the motion had been moved -- that was my 
understanding -- and that's why I said that.  And that's why I said that 
because that was my understanding. 
 
And there are no seconders required for superseding motions.  But 
essentially what I want is your views, a wide-ranging discussion on the 
admissibility of that type of a motion.  And it was my understanding that 
he had moved the motion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Oh well no, Mr. Speaker, how can that be?  With 
respect, the procedure, in order to avoid exactly this kind of confusion, 
when the Government House Leader moves a motion, then Mr. Speaker rises and 
reads the motion and says, is the House ready for the question.  And then 
we go on. 
 
I listened with some care to the Government House Leader and I didn't hear 
him ever say:  I move the following motion.  If he did, then you have the 
responsibility to rise in your place and say: the Government House Leader 
has moved that -- whatever he might have moved -- is the House ready for 
the question.  None of that occurred, and I assumed I was talking for a 
second time on the point of order. 
 
If indeed there's a motion, I want to know that.  And that is very 
important to this discussion.  I have asked some others in the Assembly and 
most of them don't think there was a motion moved.  So if there was, you've 
got to clarify it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member for Regina North, I'm going to recognizes . 
. . Moose Jaw North, I'm going to recognize him unless he gives way because 
I believe he had the floor before you.  Okay, the hon. member for Saskatoon 



 

 

Westmount. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, I want to make reference 
to the rules of the Assembly and I may say, to precede this, that I 
distinctly recall you saying, Mr. Speaker, that the member for Melfort may 
go ahead, but I don't accept it as a motion.  So therefore there is no 
motion on the floor.  The member for Melfort didn't move a motion.  We were 
discussing points of order.  The rules are quite clear in our Assembly, 
rule no. 40: 
 

 All motions shall be in writing, and seconded, before being proposed from 
the Chair.  When a motion is seconded, it shall be read by the Speaker 
before debate. 

 
The rules are quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that this was not done.  The member 
for Melfort therefore does not have a motion on the floor.  And what we're 
discussing is a point of order which was raised during the presentation of 
petitions, which was the first order of business today, which we are on 
now. 
 
And any points of order have to relate to the point of order that was 
raised with regard to the petition.  The whole discussion of the member for 
Melfort was out of order because it was referring to extraneous material 
and not to the point of order. 
 
I attempted to rise at that time, Mr. Speaker, but I unfortunately didn't 
catch your eye.  But the member for Melfort was clearly talking about 
extraneous issues and not the point of order which we had before the House.  
He was bringing up something else related to some motion that he had in the 
back of his head that he hasn't put on paper. 
 
Therefore, not only is he out of order because he didn't put it on paper, 
but he rose and he spoke on it and he was out of order because he was 
speaking to something that wasn't before the House, but to the point of 
order.  And he was out of order because he was not speaking to it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond to your request for 
input regarding the admissibility of the motion.  And I assume therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, that we do not have a motion before us.  Because if we had a 
motion before us, it would be illogical to have any submissions as to 
whether it's admissible or not. 
 
A motion has to either be accepted or not accepted.  I'm not aware, Mr. 
Speaker, of any parliamentary procedure which allows a motion to be in 
limbo where it's neither in nor out, so to speak. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm assuming that: (a) not having heard a motion 



 

 

presented; (b) not having heard a motion read to the Assembly by yourself; 
and (c) responding to your request to have comments made by members as to 
where a motion would be admissible or not, are all reason to believe that 
we do not have a motion before us. 
 
And I think you've reinforced that quite significantly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I stand then not to address a motion which is not before us, but to respond 
as best as I can to your request to members to express opinion about the 
admissibility of the motion not before us.  And also, Mr. Speaker, to bring 
a point to your attention, sir, on the original point of order, which I'm 
not clear in my own mind, but I think we're still on.  If it's acceptable 
to you sir, I'd like to make a comment on that. 
 
On the point of order that the Government House Leader brought to the 
Assembly, in essence as I understood his argument, it was that he believes 
that the official opposition is obstructing the ability of the Assembly to 
do its business.  If there's anyone in this Assembly who doesn't know this, 
then they would be the only people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Because I 
think virtually all people in Saskatchewan would know that the official 
opposition is opposed to the introduction of the closure motion on Bill 61 
and has been communicating on a daily basis to the Government House Leader 
that the official opposition is willing to do business of the House, except 
to allow the closure motion to come to the Assembly. 
 
So I want to put this into context, Mr. Speaker.  If you are considering 
that the Government House Leader's argument has significance, in that any 
actions of the opposition, regardless of how you may interpret them, are 
holding up all government business, it's clearly only interfering with one 
item of government business, and that's the government's announced 
intention to invoke closure.  That's all that I think any reasonable person 
would assume is being held up. 
 
But implicit in this as well, Mr. Speaker . . . and I stand -- I truly do 
-- with an appreciation for the pressure under which you find yourself, 
sir, because obviously, as Speaker, you are being asked to make a ruling 
about which both sides of the Assembly have very, very strong feelings, as 
do the people of Saskatchewan.  And we all in this Assembly understand 
that. 
 
 DAnd do I think it's important that the ruling be made by fairly applying 
the rules of the House, as you interpret them, and precedent as you 
understand that, sir.  And I would simply ask that the ruling also be made 
in the context of the reality of what is happening; one point being that on 
a daily basis the opposition is communicating to the Government House 
Leader that if he wishes to call any business other than the closure 
motion, that that will be permitted. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Blackmail. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And the member from Rosthern says that's blackmail.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, let me respond to that.  The member from Rosthern says that's 
blackmail.  There would be many people in Saskatchewan who would be of the 



 

 

view that when only three opposition members have been allowed to speak for 
a total of less than six hours on the largest tax increase Bill in the 
history of the province, that they would use the word "blackmail."  Now I 
think that's not really relevant to the argument, Mr. Speaker, and let me 
go on past the member of Rosthern's comments here. 
 
There is implicit in what we're talking about here some other important 
principles, I believe, related to democratic functioning.  And I don't, Mr. 
Speaker, I don't want to make light of the importance of the decision that 
you have to make. 
 
There is a very long-standing tradition of . . . in democracies, in 
democratic governments, of not having taxation without representation.  And 
clearly there are people in Saskatchewan who live in four constituencies 
who are -- it is being proposed by the government -- going to be subjected 
to taxation without representation. 
 
People in the constituencies of Indian Head-Wolseley, of Souris-Cannington, 
of Turtleford, and of Kindersley, Mr. Speaker, have only one vehicle to 
present their views directly to the Assembly.  Those people, Mr. Speaker, 
do not have an elected member to bring their views about this tax Bill, 
which is central to the whole argument that's before us.  They do not have 
a vehicle to have it brought directly to the floor of the Assembly other 
than through the reading of their will by way of petition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think when we talk about . . . When the member from 
Rosthern wants to use the word "blackmail," or they want to talk about 
holding hostage and being undemocratic and so on -- and I don't think it's 
relevant to the argument, but I don't think it's entirely irrelevant either 
-- that what we have are people in constituencies who have been without 
representation for as long as 18 months -- the longest time in the history 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, let me . . . I see you are wanting me to wrap up, and 
let me do that.  Just to respond finally to the point made by the member 
from Thunder Creed, who said that there is not something of substance being 
done in the presentation of petitions.  That would clearly not be he view 
of those people who signed those petitions, including some of the 
constituents of the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
But it is in my mind as well, Mr. Speaker, significant and maybe symbolic 
of this whole conflict before us, that the petitions themselves are calling 
for the government to call an election to earn a mandate to present its tax 
Bill.  And that's simply all that is being communicated through those 
petitions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I simply ask, as a member of the Assembly, that you use 
fair and independent judgement, which I believe you will and is befitting 
of your Chair in these emotional times that we are in in Saskatchewan right 
now.  And I believe, sir, that if you do that, I am confident that you will 
find that the Government House Leader's point of order will not be well 
founded. 
 



 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just want to refer, 
in respect to the debate that's going on here, to Beauchesne's 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 5th Edition, page 151, rule 417(2)(b): 
 

  iSuperseding r motions, though independent in form, are moved in the 
course of debate on questions which they seek to set aside.  They may only 
be moved when a question is under debate, and cannot be moved by a Member 
rising on a point of order. 

 
And clearly that applies to the House Leader in this instance. 
 
I want to say also, Mr. Speaker, that in respect to the arguments put 
forward by the House Leader, he indicates . . . referred to 1987 precedent 
from Ottawa, that it is not relevant.  And I want to say that it's not 
relevant, referring to the 1987 precedent in Ottawa, because the precedent 
was set by Mr. Speaker in this House in 1989, which superseded the ruling 
in Ottawa on 1987.  And so we have a clear ruling of yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
in respect to it. 
 
Also the Leader of the Opposition referred to 1991 examples from Ontario.  
Well we can of course look also to other provinces.  But I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have a unique character in this House.  And the Speaker 
has and may have looked at Ottawa, may have looked at Ontario, but as I 
said previously, that in 1989 you set the precedent in respect to what 
we're discussing here today. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I think it's perfectly clear where the decision 
should be made -- that the point of order should not be well taken; that in 
fact we do not have a motion before the House, and the petition should be 
allowed to proceed. 
 
And if you take a look at the clock, Mr. Speaker, we have spent over an 
hour and a half, somewhere in that neighbourhood, debating an issue, and we 
could have put forward all of the petitions that we had for the people of 
this province. 
 
But I want to say it's a very important decision what you make here.  I 
don't think that we should go on any further with the confusion of whether 
a motion is on the House.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think what I want 
to do at this time is to move a motion to adjourn the House.  And I so move 
to adjourn the House. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The hon. member cannot move a motion of adjournment 
when he's speaking to a point of order. 
 
But I would just like to bring this to the hon. member's attention -- that 
after members have spoken to the issue, I propose to recess the House . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I'm going to recess the House now. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 
reiterate . . . not reiterate, but to support the comments made by my 
colleague, the member for Quill Lakes. 
 



 

 

I think Beauchesne's is fairly clear on the point before you, that a member 
should not be allowed to use a point of order to interject himself into a 
debate, and to use that as an opportunity to move to other items on the 
agenda.  And that's what the Government House Leader did in this instance. 
 
There's also a very clear question here as to whether or not according to 
Beauchesne's, the House was involved in debate, whether there was a 
question before the House.  In fact members were presenting petitions to 
the House.  So I think that Beauchesne's is very clear on that point that 
you wish to entertain, and that is that the admissibility of a superseding 
motion should not be allowed, given the context in which it's raised. 
 
Certainly there's opportunities for superseding motions, but I think that 
the Government House Leader would be allowed to take very great advantage 
of the rules and to be allowed to operate under the widest sort of 
interpretation of the rules if you were to rule in his favour and allow 
admissibility of a superseding motion in the way which this has been done. 
 
I also want to make a few . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The hon. member for Saskatoon South has indicated 
to me that he wishes leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the members for giving me leave to 
introduce some guests here today.  I have 27 grade 8 students from Prince 
Philip School in Saskatoon.  They are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  
And I want to welcome them to Regina and to this legislature.  I know 
they've had a very busy day.  And the proceedings in the House today are 
somewhat different than what you would usually find them, but I will 
explain that to you later when we meet for drinks downstairs. 
 
They are accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by their teachers, Mrs. Patricia 
Attfield, Mr. Mike Thiessen.  Their chaperons are Mr. Godfrey, Mrs. Witt, 
Mrs. Janzen, and Mrs. Jackson.  And I believe their bus driver Jack -- I 
don't know his last name -- is also with them. 
 
I want to welcome you here, I hope you've had a very interesting day and a 
very informative day.  I'll be with you in a few minutes to answer any 
questions that you may have.  And I ask all the members to join me in 
welcoming the students from Prince Philip School. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again, Mr. Speaker, it's my 
submission that contrary to the stipulations in Beauchesne's, that there 
was no discussion taking place.  In fact you made it quite clear, Mr. 
Speaker, on a number of occasions that members can only reference the 



 

 

preamble to a petition once and should not further refer to any preambles 
so as to make it clear that there was in fact no debate taking place. 
 
And you've cautioned the members on a number of occasions about that.  So I 
think that it's clear to all concerned, Mr. Speaker, and if it wasn't, you 
were making it clear that there was no debate taking place and therefore 
there can be no admissibility of any superseding motion as is anticipated 
in Beauchesne's 417, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was no question under discussion.  And rising on a point of order to 
introduce the superseding motion as the Government House Leader wanted to 
do, is clearly, clearly, clearly not provided for in any of the rules that 
we refer to in guiding the debate in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I might be permitted to make a few additional comments, and 
I want to agree with the Government House Leader when he refers to other 
jurisdictions doing things in different ways.  They certainly do.  But in 
Saskatchewan we have evolved our own rules, we have evolved our own way of 
doing things, and even if closure and limiting debate and things of that 
nature are far more common in parliament, they are not common to this 
House.  They are not part of the tradition of this House; they are not part 
of the history of Saskatchewan.  We have tended to have a far more open 
forum for debate in the Saskatchewan legislature than many other 
jurisdictions do, and you have to take that into account in making your 
ruling on that point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that's very important to remember that, that we cannot willy-nilly 
take precedence from other jurisdictions and say, that suits our purposes.  
Because even if it suits our purpose of the moment, it certainly is 
contrary to the history and tradition of this Legislative Assembly, sir.  
And I ask you to bear that in mind when you make your ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the government is proposing to do . . . And it has to be 
put into context.  And I think that all of us would be naive if we didn't 
put this in the context of a Bill which is before the House which has seen 
the participation of three members of the House and a debate of the 64 
members of the Legislative Assembly.  We've seen the government move to put 
closure on that particular Bill. 
 
And we now see the government trying to use the rules of the House in 
Beauchesne's to interject a superseding motion to put aside all other 
business so the government can get on with closure to shut off debate on 
the Bill. 
 
(1600) 
 
This is a major, major tax Bill.  And whatever feelings people have on this 
Bill, whether it's for or against, the fact of the matter is it's a major 
tax Bill.  It would take money out of the pockets of people and use it for 
government purposes.  The Legislative Assembly, I think, can have few, few 
other responsibilities than to make sure that any money which is taken from 
the public is taken carefully and is only subject to great scrutiny and 
great debate.  And I think other members may have more to say on that. 



 

 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that if we want to deviate from the rules 
that we have before us, it should be done in the context of some 
parliamentary reform.  If we want to limit debate, if we want to vary the 
nature of the debate, if we want debate to go more to committees, then it 
seems to me the government has an obligation to put a Bill or a motion 
before us and say, this is what we want to do; here's our program as to how 
debate in the Saskatchewan legislature should be changed. 
 
Hopefully that kind of proposal is done with the support of all members of 
the House and is also done with some support of the public.  And if you 
haven't got that kind of agreement, if you haven't got that support from 
all sides of the House, then there's a real question whether you should 
proceed in that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly any major change to the way that we operate, which 
has been largely without closure, certainly without superseding motion 
unless it is agreed to, should in fact have seen a review by some external 
committee and should not be introduced in this way through the back door -- 
the government standing up with no notice, through the back door saying, we 
want to shut off debate so we can move to discussion on a major tax Bill. 
 
That is not the right way.  And, Mr. Speaker, I might say that this session 
is in danger of closing the way it started in 1986 when the government 
moved without any warning, without any consultation, without any agreement 
-- said we want to limit the number of people that sit on committees.  And 
we said in that case that's the wrong way to proceed.  You can't do it 
without support of all sides of the House.  That's the way to go.  That's 
the way we've done it in Saskatchewan.  Let's not change it now.  You have 
an obligation, sir, to make sure that the history of this province and the 
traditions of this legislature are maintained.  I ask you to rule against 
what the Government House Leader wants to do.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to be very brief again because I know 
that you want to take the recess and . . . But, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me 
that when I look -- and I refer you, sir, to rule 29(k) of the rules of 
this Legislative Assembly -- and I wonder, sir, if you could look at this 
while you're making the judgement. 
 
Rule 29(k) explicitly, in my judgement -- and I believe the judgement of 
any reasonable person -- would disallow what the Government House Leader is 
attempting to do.  Rule 29(k), Mr. Speaker, makes reference to rules which 
change or motions which change.  And I want to refer you to the exact 
wordings.  Those motions: 
 

 . . . as may be required for the observance of the proprieties of the 
Assembly, the maintenance of its authority, the appointment or conduct of 
its officers, the management of its business (and I want to underline 
that, the management of its business), the arrangement of its proceedings 
(and that strikes directly at what the Government House Leader is 
referring, the arrangement of the proceedings), the correctness of its 



 

 

records, the fixing of its sitting . . . times . . . 
 

And so on and so forth.  Mr. Speaker, my point is this.  Under rule 29(k) 
-- and it makes explicit reference to routine proceedings -- those routine 
proceedings under this rule refers to government orders and the way in 
which motions are normally dealt with in this Assembly.  They can be 
introduced by way of committee report, for example from the Rules 
Committee, or by giving proper notice of 48 hours notice of motion which is 
the proper notice to come up under orders of the day. 
 
That's what it seems to me because the Government House Leader is arguing 
to change.  If he's wishing to suspend the rules of the Legislative 
Assembly, which is referred to here under (j), or to the conduct and 
maintenance of the propriety of the House under (j), he's wishing to make 
those changes to the rules of this Assembly. 
 
It seems to me that this rule 29(1)(k) explicitly refers to those changes 
as can be made only and solely under routine proceedings, in this case 
under government orders of the day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose and 
then I'm going to recognize the member for Saskatoon University, and 
that'll be the last speaker. 
 
Mr. Swan:-- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I believe today that we've seen an 
example of how the business of the House can be disrupted for long periods 
of time on a number of different issues. 
 
But on the issue that this all started over, the presenting petitions, in 
all the years that I was Speaker we had many times seen presenting of 
petitions occur and at times we've seen stacks of . . . hundreds of pages 
presented by one person, and those petitions then are received by the 
legislature and have the same impact as what we are seeing happening now of 
presenting petitions one page at a time simply to delay the House. 
 
I believe in your looking at this issue, Mr. Speaker, that we have to look 
with realism at what's happening.  It's strictly a delay of the House 
that's been occurring, and I believe that any time that you have a group of 
petitions with the same prayer, in many cases from the same community, you 
don't have to read off the name and the address of each person, but rather 
you present the petition and the legislature receives it and it's there for 
the legislative members to review.  That's the more proper method of 
looking at petitions. And it's been done for many, many years in that 
format. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe we have a very serious issue before you for you to 
go and have some time to make that decision; that we should allow you very 
soon to recess the House and have the opportunity to bring in you ruling on 
this issue. 
 
I trust, Mr. Speaker, that in looking at this you will look with the best 
interests of the public and the legislature at heart so that the work of 
this House can proceed and that the petitions of the public can still be 



 

 

placed before the House.  And I'm sure that they can both be accomplished 
and we can get on with the regular business of the legislature. 
 
So I'm going to sit down and allow you to recess the House so we can get on 
with other things. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the 
outset that I agree with your proposal to recess the House and give this 
matter careful thought. 
 
My intervention is going to be very brief, sir.  I want to draw your 
attention to the section under "Right to Petition" in section 21 of the 6th 
Edition of Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
as you know, that section begins with saying that: 
 

 The right (to petition) the Crown and Parliament for redress of grievances 
is acknowledged as a fundamental principle of the constitution . . . 

 
The portion of this "Right to Petition" section, sir, that I particularly 
want to draw your attention to in the hope that it will be helpful to you 
in considering your decision is section 1016 under "Right to Petition."  
And there it says, and I'll just read one line from that section: 
 

 The presentation of petitions has again become common both as a method of 
drawing attention to government policies and as a means of disrupting the 
Government's legislative schedule. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm not of the view that the presentation of petitions as 
a fundamental right in the form that we've been doing has been disruptive.  
But I want to say, sir, that even if you viewed it to be disruptive, I 
believe it's clear, under this section that that is an appropriate use of 
the right to petition, that the presentation of petitions as a means of 
disrupting the government's legislative schedule is clearly laid out in 
Beauchesne's as being an appropriate practice for members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And on that basis, sir, I would suggest to you that, while I don't believe 
we've been disruptive, even if you were to ascertain that we have been, the 
proposal and the motion that the Government House Leader wants to move is 
clearly out of order based on this provision in Beauchesne's.  Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: -- I thank all hon. members for their views.  I know they all 
spoke very sincerely and for the good of the Assembly.  I will now recess 
the House and consider the issues before the House and report back at a 
later time. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Recess for the rest of the day or are you just going to 
. . . . 
The Speaker: -- That's a good idea.  The hour being almost 4:15, if someone 
wishes to propose an adjournment motion, I'll accept it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Could we just recess till tomorrow at 2 o'clock? 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Well we can adjourn it, if somebody wishes to adjourn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On your request, I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:13 p.m. 
 


