





























































Hansard: April 26, 1991


 

 

April 26/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you, to the 
members of the legislature, Mr. Russ Gibb, who is sitting in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Gibb served in the Saskatoon light infantry from 1940 to 1945.  He 
worked in the post office as a letter carrier from 1946 to 1978.  He joined 
the Corps of Commissioners and has served from 1979 and is still serving.  
He's also been a member of the militia for 22 years.  He's been 51 years in 
uniform.  Please welcome Mr. Gibb to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me this morning to 
introduce to you and other members of the Assembly, a group of 15 Grade 11 
students.  They're in your gallery, sir.  They are accompanied this morning 
by teacher and chaperon, Mr. Jim Olesen.  And these students, Mr. Speaker, 
are going to be participating in an interchange on Canadian studies in 
Fredericton the first week in May. 
 
They're from all over the province, Mr. Speaker, and they're going to be 
discussing a series of very important issues in so far as Saskatchewan and 
Canada are concerned.  I have no doubt that these young people will be very 
good ambassadors for the province of Saskatchewan.  They come highly 
recommended from their schools and their school divisions, and I would ask 
all members in the Assembly to welcome this group this morning and also to 
wish them a very enjoyable and worthwhile trip to Fredericton in the next 
couple of weeks. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure to introduce to 
you and through you to the members of this Assembly, grade 11 and 12 
students sitting in your gallery.  They are here from the St. Isodore 
School, St. Isodore de Bellevue.  They are accompanied by their teachers 
Andrea Gareau and Yvette Gaudet.  I would like to welcome them.  I look 
forward meeting with them at 11 o'clock, and I hope they enjoy their 
session, the question period, and I wish them a good trip back home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Leadership 
 



 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, thank you finally, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Premier, the people of this province have suffered 
from your waste and your mismanagement, from your incompetence and your 
arrogance and your government's patronage and corruption -- nine years of 
suffering as of today, Mr. Premier. 
 
In nine years you've taken a surplus of $139 million and you've turned it 
into a deficit of $5 billion.  In nine years you've taken a surplus of $139 
million and you've turned it into a deficit of $5 billion, the highest per 
capita debt in Canada.  For nine years you've had to make choices, and for 
nine years you've made choices to betray the people of Saskatchewan, and I 
ask you, Mr. Premier, how in the world can you call that leadership? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to respond to the hon. 
member today, and I particularly want to thank the members of the 
legislature that did acknowledge that it was nine years ago that on April 
26 that the Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan was elected 
by the people in a full democratic . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And again, Mr. Speaker, they were re-elected in 1986 by 
the people based on the fact that we did have a plan.  And we do have a 
plan to help agriculture, to maintain rural Saskatchewan, to diversify the 
communities, to watch the processing and manufacturing, Mr. Speaker.  And 
even despite grassphoppers or $2 wheat or drought or very difficult 
conditions, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to be there for people, to protect 
them against high interest rates when the opposition didn't.  We abandoned 
the packages that said the government should own your land like land bank.  
We went into the people and listened, Mr. Speaker, and we opened our hearts 
to the people.  We opened our hearts, and we said we'll be there for you in 
good times and in bad times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- So today it is particularly pleasing for me, Mr. 
Speaker, to be able to stand in this legislature and say we'll be there 
again with GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net income 
stabilization account), interest-rate protection, diversification, and the 
good things that the people of Saskatchewan want from this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Premier, you can blame grasshoppers and everything else, but the people of 
Saskatchewan blame you. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Instead of providing the leadership that we've needed, 
you have provided excuses for every one of your government's failures.  You 
blame sick people looking for a hospital bed.  You blame seniors and accuse 
them of abusing drugs.  You have blamed the weather and you've blamed 
students looking for a chance to get an education.  It seems, Mr. Premier, 
that everyone is responsible but you. 
 
The question, Mr. Premier, is as follows.  Leadership is defined not by a 
person's successes; leadership is defined by how a person deals with 
difficulties.  And for nine years you have failed to deal with the 
difficult choices.  For nine years.  Mr. Premier, nine years ago leadership 
in Saskatchewan died.  Whose fault but yours can that be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said, the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, nine years ago, Mr. Speaker . . . the people of Saskatchewan 
faced 21 per cent interest rates, years of an NDP (New Democratic Party) 
administration, and they said, Mr. Speaker, the NDP won't listen. 
 
It's just like this legislature, Mr. Speaker.  They didn't listen then and 
they don't listen now.  They can ask a question and they can talk and they 
can yip at their heels, at anybody's heels, but will they deliver, Mr. 
Speaker?  Where's their plan? 
 
In 1982 we said, Mr. Speaker, yes, we will be with the people; we'll 
protect your mortgages against 21 per cent interest rates.  They didn't do 
that.  We were elected -- nine years ago today. 
 
In 1986 we said we'd do the same, Mr. Speaker.  We would protect your farms 
and your villages, we would diversify the economy, we would build paper 
mills and upgraders and diversify this great province of Saskatchewan.  And 
they elected us again, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP didn't understand. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I'll say in 1991 this administration will be re-elected 
because we have a plan for the people, by the people, and for the people . 
. . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Taxation Increases 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, one can understand 
the Premier wanting to dwell on the past; his future is a great deal more 
bleak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, was to the Minister of 
Finance.  However since the Premier's been congratulated by his caucus, 



 

 

perhaps it's appropriate that he answer. 
 
Mr. Premier, nine years ago the public voted for a party which promised 
lower taxes and a leaner, more efficient government.  What in fact they got 
. . . they did not get a sales tax which was eliminated; they got a higher 
sales tax.  You promised to reduce income tax by 10 points; in fact you've 
increased it grotesquely.  You promised to eliminated gas tax; it's now 
back on at 46 cents. 
 
Mr. Premier, the public are seething with anger over the taxes.  How do you 
expect them to react when you've delivered the exact opposite of what you 
promised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that the people get 
to choose in democracy, and they've chosen us twice now, in '82 and '86.  
And they will choose us again if we earn their respect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you go across the province of Saskatchewan and you ask them -- 
whether it's the city of Regina, people of Prince Albert, people of The 
Battlefords, or rural towns and villages -- they will say, I want to see 
stability; I want to see diversification; I want to see a plan for the 
future.  There's more to government than just complaining, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I listened to people in Prince Albert the other day, talking about the NDP 
candidate in the Shellbrook-Torch River constituency.  And I think his name 
is Langford.  These people would know him.  He admitted, Mr. Speaker, he 
admitted to the farmers and the neighbours in his community that the NDP 
don't have an agriculture policy because, frankly, their leader wouldn't 
understand an agriculture policy if they brought it over to their caucus 
meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Langford admitted that, Mr. Speaker.  They don't have a 
diversification policy, Mr. Speaker, if you will.  They don't have a 
diversification policy.  They don't have an energy policy, an oil policy, a 
pulp and paper policy, an agriculture policy.  Their candidates don't know 
it.  Their leader knows it, Mr. Speaker.  That's why he's falling like a 
rock, the longer this campaign goes on without . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Farm Debt Restructuring 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I note the best defence is an 
offence, and that's what the government opposite are trying to do. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to our famous Minister of 
Agriculture, the Premier.  Mr. Minister, for nine years now you and your 
federal counterparts have failed to produce a debt-restructuring program 
for farm families in this province.  Again in your budget you have 
mentioned nothing about debt restructuring. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is this:  how is it that for some people like 
yourself debt restructuring in a land flip is very simple, but for 
thousands and thousands of other Saskatchewan farm families debt 
restructuring means being forced off the land? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll go anywhere across this province, Mr. 
Speaker, with that member from Humboldt and talk about agriculture and talk 
about interest rate protection and talk about the kinds of things that are 
significant to the people of Saskatchewan in agriculture. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it may be difficult for the members of the gallery to 
hear me but it isn't difficult for the members of the public watching this 
on television to hear the response that I'm giving. 
 
So I will continue, Mr. Speaker, to say to that member: in 1982 when 
interest rates were 21 per cent, farmers cried out all over the place, 
would you help me.  Would the NDP administration help me.  They asked, Mr. 
Speaker.  You know it's a fact; I know it's a fact. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what happened?  The members that were 
representing Humboldt, the members that were representing Shaunavon were 
defeated in their ridings, Mr. Speaker, and they had to run to the cities 
of Regina to get elected because they didn't have an agricultural policy.  
And those two members that are sitting over there today, Mr. Speaker, are 
the best testimony, they're the best testimony to no NDP agriculture policy 
that you could have in history.  They got kicked out of their rural 
ridings.  They run into the middle of the city and they say, yes, we have 
the answers. 
 
The reason that there's a debt and there's a problem in agriculture goes 
back to 1979, 1980, 1981 -- 21 per cent interest rates.  The NDP did 
nothing about it .  They lost their ridings, Mr. Speaker, and they're going 
to lose every riding in the province that is linked to rural Saskatchewan 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Premier, who 
has obviously got his fair share in Saskatchewan whereas other farmers are 
being forced off the land.  Mr. Premier, your government's record of health 
care for nine years has been one of cut-backs, bed closures, waiting-lists, 
deterrent fees, fired health-care workers, and specialists leaving this 



 

 

province in numbers. 
 
One of the worst excesses was the decision in 1987 to end the school-based 
children's dental plan.  In 1986 you paid 10.2 million in personal services 
to provide this program with more than 400 practitioners.  This year you 
are paying 10.3 million for a program that delivers considerably less in 
service.  There's no justification for what you did in 1987, but shallow 
ideology. 
 
For nine years you have let your right-wing political ideology interfere 
with your duty to deliver health-care services.  Now what gave you the 
right to treat Saskatchewan people in that manner, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, 
about all the NDP administration and the NDP people have left now in their 
so-called bag of tricks is the old mediscare tactics.  That's it.  They 
don't have an agriculture plan, they don't have a diversification plan, 
they don't have a management plan, but they have the NDP scare tactics that 
they tried in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and they'll try again. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, they have no plan for health care at all.  In 
fact the member that just spoke, Mr. Speaker, admitted on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio, News 12:05, it says and I quote, and I 
can't say the member's name, but she said . . . here it says, WestScan 
Media Services, Louise Simard: there's no plan as it sits now.  That's the 
NDP health . . . (inaudible) . . .  There's no plan as it sits.  Well they 
don't even have a plan for health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We doubled expenditures on health care.  We brought in 
the new health card.  We . . . (inaudible) . . . data services.  We're 
expanding nursing home capacity by almost 2,000 spaces, Mr. Speaker.  We 
have dentists' offices opening all across Saskatchewan.  And the NDP, going 
into the 1991 campaign, says: there is no plan as it sits now.  That speaks 
for itself.  That speaks volumes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Job Creation for Young People 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I direct my 
question to the Premier. 
 
The Speaker: --  Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  I 
know it's Friday morning and there are reasons why perhaps hon. members 
have extra enthusiasm this morning.  The member from Regina Lakeview, if I 
may have your attention.  I would like to ask hon. members to restrain 
themselves.  I really don't think hollering and talking all the way through 
when the Speaker is on his feet is an appropriate way for members to 
behave.  I've given you ample opportunity to settle down, and I'm asking 



 

 

you to do so again. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, the future of 
any province, including ours, is our young people.  And over the last six 
years in the province of Saskatchewan we've seen a net loss of over 80,000 
people from our province, more than three-quarters of them under the age of 
35, Mr. Premier. 
 
For the period of 1981 to 1990, Saskatchewan had the distinction in our 
nation of having the worst job-creation record for the decade in the nation 
-- an increase of only 5.6 per cent in the number of jobs held in total.  
Jobs for young people in that same period, Mr. Premier, for people aged 15 
to 24 dropped from 109,000 to 79,000 in the same period. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier, I ask you to explain on this your ninth 
anniversary, how do you explain your dismal nine-year record of failing to 
provide jobs and opportunities for the young people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member will be interested in the 
truth -- that there are more people in the province of Saskatchewan now, 
than we were elected in 1982.  And the population is 30,000, 40,000 bigger 
than it was.  The hon. member won't acknowledge that, but that's the case.  
Under very difficult circumstances, we've increased the population. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, when we move towards diversifying the economy, 
whether it's in Moose Jaw or whether it's in Prince Albert or whether it's 
in Regina, the NDP members stand up and they say all over the province, I'm 
against the new fertilizer project.  Now I would like the members from 
Moose Jaw, if they have the courage and they are honest about 
diversification and jobs for young people, to stand in their place, Mr. 
Speaker, and say we support the fertilizer plant, the Saferco plant, next 
to Moose Jaw. 
 
Do you think they'd do that, Mr. Speaker?  No, their leader, their leader 
will condemn that plant all across the province.  When he's in P.A. he says 
that fertilizer plant's no good; when they're in Estevan they say that 
fertilizer plant's no good.  When that member from Moose Jaw North stands 
up and says, well I'd like to see diversification, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, 
will he stand in his place today and support the processing of natural gas, 
and the fertilizer production to this province and for the community of 
Moose Jaw.  Will he do that, Mr. Speaker?  Isn't that a fair question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have a question to the Premier whose 
land deals are well-known to the people of this province.  I want to talk 
about their nine-year record in education.  They've had money for Cargill 
Grain; they've had money for their political hacks; they've had money for 
Weyerhaeuser; they've had money for all kinds of out-of-province 



 

 

corporations, but they haven't had any money for our universities, they 
haven't had any money for our schools, and they haven't had any money for 
our technical schools. 
 
Now we have a situation where we have enrolment quotas at our universities; 
we've laid off hundreds of technical staff at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology); we have lost thousands of student 
placements at our technical schools, and we have a record of school 
closures in rural Saskatchewan and teacher lay-offs. 
 
I want the Premier of Saskatchewan to explain money for Weyerhaeuser but no 
money for the young people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, isn't it interesting, the member for Moose 
Jaw stands up and he talks about population and he says, and to be fair to 
him, he says, well it's about the same as . . . (inaudible) . . . I will 
say, Mr. Speaker, that after the nine years the population is only up 30 or 
40,000 people. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I'll say to the member opposite, during that 
time, difficult economic times, modest increase in population, we have 
virtually doubled the budget in health care and doubled the budget in 
education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you can take inflation; you can take all the factors you want.  This 
administration has put money into health and money into education like no 
administration in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A new College of Agriculture -- $90 million, Mr. Speaker.  And I don't 
believe that it would have happened without this administration.  And I say 
that with great respect to the members opposite . . . (inaudible) . . . And 
that's almost $100 million . . . (inaudible) . . . a 50 per cent increase 
in enrolment, a new SIAST college in Prince Albert.  Now that's investment 
in education. 
 
They're against the paper mill in Prince Albert, they're against the 
fertilizer plant, they're against the upgraders.  And when we double the 
expenditures in health and education in difficult times, they say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we don't have a plan.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they are so void of 
a plan that they're going to remain in opposition, Mr. Speaker, maybe for 
the rest of your entire life, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Privatization 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question too is 
to the Premier.  And Mr. Premier, when you took over and became Premier . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  The member for Rosthern, 



 

 

order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my question too is to the Premier.  And 
when you became Premier, you said to the people that privatization would be 
the saviour of the economy of the province.  Mr. Premier, you promised that 
the debt would go down, that taxes would go down, and more people would be 
employed. 
 
Well after nine years of privatization we've seen record high taxes -- $14 
billion in debt.  Mr. Premier, could you answer the question that people 
are asking all over the province.  Where in the world did all the money go, 
Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, they're coming out . . . the hon. members 
. . . (inaudible) . . . that the NDP administration had a hidden deficit, 
Mr. Speaker, of billions of dollars.  And you know the student . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was just saying that the 
opposition will be interested to know is that it's been well documented, as 
we did in 1982, the hidden deficit of the NDP administration --  not only 
because of the debt in the Crown corporations and the $90,000 a day that it 
lost in PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) and the huge amount of money it 
spent on land bank, buying farmers' land and saying it was going to save 
them -- but the debt in the Crowns and the money they borrowed to buy the 
potash to take it over, not build any new ones.  All of that plus the 
combination of debts were there, Mr. Speaker, literally in the billions and 
billions of dollars. 
 
Now the hon. member says, well what have you done with respect to 
privatization?  I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, by taking and replacing that 
old debt with people's investment, we now have Saskoil and a brand-new 
building downtown.  There are 600 employees and one of the finest companies 
you'll find in the energy business any place in North America -- Saskoil.  
Mr. Speaker, I was there with the mayor of Regina, opening up the brand-new 
building, and the people there said, that's the finest that we have seen in 
the energy business in the province of Saskatchewan.  That's privatization.  
You take the potash industry, you can take the pulp and paper mill, Mr. 
Speaker, and I could go on with the fertilizer plant and many, many more, 
Mr. Speaker -- exactly the thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Government Investment Decisions 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- To the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Allow the hon. member to put his 
question. 
 



 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Premier, for nine years you've made wingy investments 
in operations like GigaText, Joytec, Supercart, M.A.S. Medical.  You've 
said Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you can afford to mismanage 
the province and still break even. 
 
When, Mr. Premier, when are Saskatchewan taxpayers going to see you recover 
their money from these bad public investments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows . . . and 
particularly those members, Mr. Speaker, that were centralized to Regina 
because they lost their rural ridings.  We'll call them the centralized 
Regina members because they lost in Humboldt and they lost in Shaunavon. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker, when they talk in this legislature, when 
Allan Blakeney talked in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and he would come 
up and say, well isn't it just terrible that we'd offer opportunities to 
invest here in the province of Saskatchewan, like you could actually buy 
shares in Saskoil . . . We'll come to find out, Mr. Speaker, Allan Blakeney 
had shares in Saskoil.  Now imagine the NDP leader standing here in the 
House arguing against it in his caucus, clapping away like this, saying 
that you shouldn't do any of that, and the member from The Battlefords and 
the centralized members talking about being big privatized stuff, Mr. 
Speaker.  What does it tell you about it?  They have no plan.  And the key 
is, Mr. Speaker, the  absolute key is the hypocrisy of campaigning against 
investing in the resources of Saskatchewan, being against it in public and 
then going out, Mr. Speaker, and admitting they own shares in the same 
company.  That tells you about the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.  Ladies and gentlemen, 
let us move on to the next order of business. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Day of Commemoration 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Sunday, April 28, 
Saskatchewan workers will observe a day of mourning for colleagues who have 
been injured or have lost their lives.  And government flags throughout the 
province will be flown at half-mast today, tomorrow, and Sunday. 
 
As Minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment, Mr. Speaker, I am 
committed to improving the health and safety of working men and women in 
our province.  To this end, our government has implemented as many changes 
as possible with existing legislation to address the concerns that were 
expressed by Saskatchewan citizens during public meetings held by the 
Occupational Health and Safety Council. 
 
I will be bringing forward amendments that The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act will address to change what we could not implement without 



 

 

legislative authority. 
 
As huge fines that may or not be ordered by the courts are not the only 
solution, the planned amendments will also recognize the importance of 
occupational health and safety committees and the need for employers and 
workers to co-operate and working together reduce accidents and injuries in 
the work place. 
 
In its report, the council recommended that enforcement of The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act and Regulations be increased.  The number of 
inspections conducted by the occupational health and safety branch of my 
department have been increased significantly.  And while it is making a 
difference and statistics show a steady decline in the number of work-place 
fatalities and serious injuries over the past six years, we recognize that 
there is more to be done and are deeply committed to even more improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because deterrents alone are not the total  
 Dsolution, I am committed to worker education and employer enforcement.  
The education and training of both workers and employers can further reduce 
work-place injuries.  Our government created a new unit in the occupational 
health and safety branch with a mandate to expand occupational health and 
safety training in the province to both workers and employers. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, one of my sons suffered a serious occupational 
injury.  My wife and I know firsthand what parents, family, and loved ones 
experience through this type of event.  And as the minister responsible, 
Mr. Speaker, I and this government have supported and will continue to 
support health and safety initiatives which protect Saskatchewan workers. 
 
We must take all reasonable action that will assist in prevention.  There 
can be no argument that one accident or one fatality that can be avoided 
would be an outstanding benefit for all of us.  As our weekend of worship 
begins, let us all pray for continued improvement in the safety of our work 
place. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In responding to the 
minister's statement related to April 28 being the day of mourning, I'd 
like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by thanking the minister for providing me a 
copy of his remarks prior to question period today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's worthy of note that here in Saskatchewan we became the 
first jurisdiction in all of Canada to put recognition of the day of 
mourning, April 28 into statute and for our leadership in the nation I am 
proud of the actions of this Legislative Assembly.  It's worthy of note as 
well that we still are the only province that has put this into statute 
although the Government of Canada has now passed similar legislation this 
year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, every year more than a thousand Canadian workers are 
killed on the job, and in the past decade here in Saskatchewan nearly 400 
working men and women have died on the job, not including agricultural 
workers who are not included in those statistics.  Thousands more are 
permanently disabled in Canada each year and hundreds of thousands are 



 

 

injured. 
 
Today in Canada and in Saskatchewan workers still die from cancer and lung 
disease and other ailments caused by exposure to toxic substances at their 
work places.  April 28 of each year is a day of mourning for these victims 
of work place accidents and disease.  It's a day that has been chosen, Mr. 
Speaker, because of its significance in history.  On April 28, 1914, the 
first workers' compensation program was introduced in our nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it's fair to say that the backbone of our society is 
not our politicians, it's not our financiers, but it's the working men and 
women of our province and of our country. 
 
April 28 is a day to remember the supreme sacrifice that they have been 
forced to make in order to earn a living.  It is a day for us here in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to determine that at the very least, as the minister 
said in his remarks, and as the Occupational Health and Safety Council 
recommended, at the very least we will see that Saskatchewan's Occupational 
Health and Safety Act is enforced -- is enforced -- in the interest of 
health and safety of the working men and women of Saskatchewan.  It is a 
day to rededicate ourselves to the goal of better occupational health and 
safety standards, to making all Saskatchewan and Canadian work places safer 
for the working men and women of our province and our nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recognize and appreciate that the minister has directed that 
the flags of the buildings owned by the province will be flown at 
half-mast, not just on April 28 this year, but over the weekend including 
today, tomorrow, and Sunday. 
 
And I would conclude, Mr. Speaker, by asking that this Assembly do what we 
did last year when we stood to commemorate the day of mourning, that the 
members of the Assembly observe a moment of silence in recognition of the 
day of mourning for workers killed and injured on the job. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Before orders of the day, with leave I would like to 
express condolences to the passing of Richard Hatfield. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to express my personal 
condolences, and I'm sure those of the members of the legislature, and I 
certainly will ask this House to join me in mourning the death of a fellow 
parliamentarian, the Hon. Richard Hatfield of New Brunswick. 
 
Mr. Hatfield passed away at the age of 60 after a long and valiant 
struggle.  His death will be mourned by the people of his native province 
of New Brunswick and by all Canadians. 
 
First elected to the New Brunswick legislature in 1961, Richard Hatfield 
served his province for more than an quarter of a century.  But his service 
extended far beyond provincial boundaries when he recognized a threat to 



 

 

the unity of Canada.  His untiring efforts to preserve the unity will long 
be remembered by all Canadians. 
 
We all owe him a great debt because of his sincere belief in the nation, 
and, Mr. Speaker, I could say from my own personal experience in having 
attended many first ministers' conferences with Richard Hatfield, he was a 
powerful defender of minorities and he spoke on their behalf eloquently 
from his province and from the national capital or from wherever he 
happened to be.  He was a great supporter of the country, and when in fact 
it looked like we were in pretty serious difficulty, he would work 
tirelessly to bring all the provinces and indeed his desire, the 
territories, into the Canadian constitution. 
 
Same time, I believe that you can recall that he spoke with intensity about 
the fact that the native people, the Indian people, Metis people of this 
country, deserve the kind of recognition that is entitled to people who 
were here first, who are here now, and will be here for a long time.  And 
he spoke on their behalf on many occasions, and he'd often make them his 
first priority. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we lament his passing.  And I can only say, as somebody 
who has been involved in public life for a much shorter time than Richard 
Hatfield, he will not be forgotten.  We have tipped our hat to some great 
men and women, those that have spoken for their province and for their 
people.  And today I just tip my hat to one of Canada's longest reigning 
premiers, one of our indeed distinguished parliamentarians.  And I will 
certainly say to his family and to his friends, the people of Saskatchewan 
will not forget him. 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the minister on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Could I have leave, or with leave, to introduce some 
guests, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member for Regina Elphinstone I believe would like 
to also speak to the Premier's . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to join with 
the government in extending condolences to the family of Mr. Hatfield.  Mr. 
Hatfield, whom I met back in 1979, I believe it was, a new politician on my 
first CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) conference to 
Fredericton and Moncton and St. Andrew's by the sea, and I believe my 
friend from Meadow Lake was along on that trip . . . And we met Mr. 
Hatfield, and I think we all were impressed by what a pleasant person he 
was in being involved with the group.  And I think, to say the least, he 
had a very pleasant way of approaching life and was a very colourful 
politician in Canada. 
 
But on the more serious side, Mr. Hatfield obviously played a big role in 
the period leading up to 1982 in terms of the constitutional debate; was 
involved with Mr. Blakeney, our premier of the time -- not always agreeing, 
I can assure you.  But I think Mr. Hatfield had the ability to cross the 
cultural lines between English and French that I think many of us wished we 



 

 

could in a way that Mr. Hatfield was able to. 
 
I want to say, as well, that even in defeat, Mr. Hatfield brought something 
to politics that I think all of us can take a look at.  Obviously he had 
the ability and the opportunity to -- and I suppose the temptation -- of 
moving from the the premier's chair to an appointment at the federal level 
or to some other position. 
 
Mr. Hatfield turned down those kind of overtures and approaches, and I 
think sets an example for other politicians who leave politics, returning 
to private life and, I think, picking up a private life that I think many 
of us from time to time envy Mr. Hatfield.  And I would want to join with 
the Premier in extending condolences and also extending a copy of the 
motion words here to the family of Mr. Hatfield. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and to the members of 
the legislature, in your west gallery I'd like to introduce Ian Eaton and 
two members of the Battle River Band: Tim Hees and Al Vickaryous.  They're 
one of Saskatchewan's most prominent and talented country-and-western 
bands.  They're our own home-grown talent.  They are presently on CMT 
(Country Music Television) channel, a country music channel on cablevision 
with their hit single and video.  They are in Regina this weekend for the 
country music awards, which is on Sunday night at the Centre of the Arts.  
I'd like to ask members of the legislature to welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
some guests as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my colleague from 
Redberry in welcoming Ian Eaton and his band.  I take great pride in the 
fact that Ian actually lives in my constituency, and I've had the 
opportunity over the last numbers of months to listen to Ian and his band 
on a number of occasions, and I must admit that he is a favourite country 
singer of mine. 
 
And it's getting to the point now, Mr. Speaker, that when people ask me 
where do I live, well I just simply say, well I'm Ian Eaton's neighbour.  
And that settles that.  So I take great pleasure in welcoming them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I would just like to briefly add my 
welcome to the legislature to Ian Eaton and his band and his family and 



 

 

friends that aren't here but are here in spirit.  I will say in terms of my 
family, my daughter Camille dances particularly often when she hears Ian 
Eaton's music.  And, in fact, she has entertained us at home and 
entertained people across the province and in many different town halls as 
a result of the kind of enthusiasm that he brought to rural Saskatchewan.  
But he's made a big difference to the province and he's made a big 
difference to my family, and I welcome him here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that the Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance, and the amendment thereto moved by Ms. Smart. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  When we 
adjourned last evening I was talking about the programs that have been 
developed by this government in the province during the last nine years in 
the area of education and laying out some of the highlights and some of the 
excellent achievements that have been made during that period of time. 
 
I had also, Mr. Speaker, indicated the very strong commitment that this 
government has to education, and in this present year we'll be spending 
over 900 millions of dollars in the education of some 275,000 students.  So 
indeed, education is a priority of this government, Mr. Speaker, and will 
continue on into the future. 
 
I had also, during my address, discussed some of the changes that are 
taking place in the K to 12 system with regard to the core curriculum -- 
how we are preparing our students for the 21st century by bringing in 
changes and ways in which they are going to be able to better adapt and to 
cope with the changes and the challenges of the 21st century. 
 
With regard to any of these changes that are taking place, Mr. Speaker, we 
realize the importance of very close collaboration with all of those groups 
who are involved in the education of our children.  When I speak of the 
collaboration, I am referring, of course, to the discussions, the 
consultation that must go on and must continue with the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees' Association, the teachers' federation, the directors of 
education, and also, Mr. Speaker, with the parents. 
 
I know that during this past year that we have sent out different 
news-letters to parents, indicating to them some of the things that are 
happening in the schools.  And I get many, many letters back from parents 
suggesting that we need to do much more of this, that we need to continue 



 

 

to increase the communication with parents in letting them know what's 
happening in our schools. 
 
I also indicated, Mr. Speaker, that we do have a very definite plan for the 
future.  We know that our young people are facing a changing world.  We 
have to ensure that they're going to be prepared for that. 
 
I also indicated some of the concerns that we have today with the fact that 
some of our enrolments have declined to the point where school boards have 
found it necessary to either close schools or to down-size schools, and 
that's a difficult decision for a school board to make.  And I do point out 
that that is the authority, the legal authority, legal right of school 
boards to make those decisions as to where those students attend school. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I indicated the many different changes that are 
taking place with SIAST and also with our regional colleges, the effort 
that this government has made to assure much greater access in rural 
Saskatchewan for individuals who want to continue with their education.  
And we do have today, Mr. Speaker, as you would well know, many individuals 
who have been out of school for some time but now wish to return to school 
and upgrade their courses, upgrade their skills so that they can in many 
cases improve on their job possibilities and promotions. 
 
We also looked at the universities and all of the expenditures that this 
government has made on the university campuses during the last nine years.  
And the one that our Premier was talking about this morning as well, the 
new College of Agriculture building which will be opening this year.  As 
well we've had several other major projects on our campuses during the last 
nine years. 
 
And something I would suggest, Mr. Speaker -- that the NDP were very, very 
lax during the good years of the 1970s when our economy was very, very 
buoyant.  There was much more money available, and the need was there, Mr. 
Speaker, but the opposition, the present NDP who were in power at that time 
did absolutely nothing about it, Mr. Speaker.  That's part of the reason 
why we have quotas today is because there's no place for these students to 
go to classes if they were able to get into university. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have made tremendous strides ahead in our 
post-secondary education in this province, and we will continue to do that. 
 
I was also discussing, Mr. Speaker, the programs that we have had in 
literacy over the last few years, and that has been supported by IBM and 
the PALS (Principles of the Alphabet Literacy System) program, and those 
initiatives will all continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We recognize that we do have a problem of illiteracy in Saskatchewan, 
although I think we can take pride in the fact that the province of 
Saskatchewan has one of the highest literacy rates in the whole country.  
And we're continuing to work on that and we will continue to work on it in 
the future. We've had excellent co-operation and support from all of the 
post-secondary institutions, libraries, school boards.  And that support 
will be there in the future as well, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Now one other area that I want to address this morning is the whole area of 
northern education.  And I must say that I was somewhat disappointed when I 
listened to the member from Cumberland in some of his remarks yesterday, 
but also the member from Athabasca, that there wasn't one word mentioned 
about the tremendous progress that has been made with education in northern 
Saskatchewan.  This has resulted, Mr. Speaker, from the northern education 
task force report, which was put together by people in the North.  Programs 
that have been suggested by people in the North, because they understand 
the needs of the North better than anyone else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have begun to implement many of those recommendations of 
that report.  I think the member from Cumberland was suggesting that so 
many reports and studies have been done in the past, and they just sit on a 
shelf.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that may have been the case, I'm sure, maybe 
back in the 1970s when they were in government.  They were doing reports 
and I'm sure a lot of them are just gathering dust.  But the northern 
education task force report is very active.  Many of the recommendations 
have already been implemented and others are in the process of being 
implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 DWe've got a lot of things happening in the area of the K to 12, and that 
we recognize that the needs of children in the North are somewhat different 
in that we have to have more materials available that get into different 
types of cultures.  The people in the North are involved in that particular 
design of the program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also understand full well the fact that we have to ensure that our 
students in the North, as in other parts of Saskatchewan, stay in school 
until they have completed their grade 12, so we've acted on recommendations 
with student retention.  We've also acted on other programs, re-entry 
programs where we do have people coming back and completing their high 
school.  Some people, Mr. Speaker, who have been out of school for 15 or 20 
years, coming back and getting their grade 12 diploma.  We know as well 
that we've got student awards programs which are designed to keep students 
in school much longer.  We've developed the native school counsellor 
program.  Again, recommendations from this northern education task force 
report. 
 
And I think the key to the success of all of these programs that I talk 
about, whether they're at the K to 12 level or the post-secondary level, is 
to do with the community involvement that we have had. 
 
I've had the opportunity to visit schools and programs in the North, and I 
must say that I'm very, very impressed with the high quality of education 
that children and adults are receiving in northern Saskatchewan.  I think 
that there are many things happening there that we can learn from and that 
we should be looking at implementing here in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
We have to be sure that the curriculum that's being designed is sensitive 
to the needs of Northerners.  When we look at the post-secondary area, we 
know that through SIAST and Northlands College . . . that there is an awful 
lot being done to meet the needs of the adult population.  I attended 



 

 

recently the official opening of Northlands College and I can assure you 
that that's a college that has facilities and programs which are second to 
none in this province.  NORTEP (northern teacher education program) 
continues to train teachers and many of them taking up positions in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And something else that I mentioned last night, Mr. Speaker, was the impact 
of the Saskatchewan Communications Network.  This is now being used in some 
areas of northern Saskatchewan, and I have no doubt that it will be used in 
many other areas in the years ahead. 
 
We also look at the joint ventures that are taking place between SIAST, the 
Department of Education, and the mining companies.  We recognize that the 
mining industry today in northern Saskatchewan -- a very, very viable 
industry . . . and we are concerned about the fact that more Northerners 
have jobs with those mining companies. 
 
Since 1982 some 850 Northerners have been trained for the mining industry.  
And not too long ago I signed an agreement with mining companies that now 
will be providing training for another 170 Northerners which will bring the 
number up over 1,000. 
 
And the future looks very bright in this area as well, Mr. Speaker, in that 
in the next five years it's estimated that another thousand jobs are going 
to be available in the mining industry, and we must do all that we can to 
ensure that Northerners are trained for these positions.  So we're very 
appreciative of the co-operation that we're getting from the mining 
companies. 
 
I think that the one concern that many Northerners would have today is 
comments that are being made by some members of the opposition with regard 
to the uranium industry, when we know full well that some of them over 
there would very much like to see the uranium industry shut down 
altogether.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if that should ever happen, we can see that 
it would be devastating for the Northerners up in the mining area. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think from this you can see that education is a 
priority in Saskatchewan, right from one end of the province to the other 
-- $903 million in funding for this year, second only to spending in health 
care. 
 
Now this of course, Mr. Speaker, has meant that our Minister of Finance and 
the government has had to look at getting funds from new sources.  And this 
has resulted in the harmonization with the GST (goods and services tax) and 
the provincial sales tax now being applied in some new areas that it wasn't 
applied before. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased that the Minister of Finance listened 
to my requests and is providing one and a half million dollars in special 
funding to cover the cost of the provincial sales tax as it would apply on 
reading materials and textbook purchases made by educational institutions 
and libraries.  So I'm very appreciative, as I know school boards and 
libraries are all across this province, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a clear plan for the future, not only in 
education, but for the overall future of our province.  The members 
opposite haven't presented their plan for Saskatchewan.  And as we've heard 
this morning again, we know that some of the candidates out in the field 
fully agree with the government that the opposition has no plans.  We 
heard, not too long ago, about one of their hopefuls in Saskatoon making 
the comment that she hoped that the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Riversdale, would make up his mind on what their policies were going 
to be so that she could get on with her campaigning. 
 
So this is coming from within their own party, Mr. Speaker.  Well we 
haven't heard anything about the plans of the NDP, and how's the Leader of 
the Opposition going to pay for this $8 billion budget?  I think we heard 
that outlined quite clearly last night -- $8 billion, that's what they want 
to spend over there. 
 
Well good questions, Mr. Speaker, but very, very difficult getting the 
answers.  No policy positions from the members opposite whatsoever.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, this government does have a long-term plan that will help to 
diversify our economy, create jobs and generate growth with economic 
stability. 
 
It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, as well, how the Leader of the Opposition 
seems to have a special interest in health and education, but at the same 
time he hasn't given any indication what that plan would be nor in fact how 
he would pay for it.  We have heard it indicated that they would get more 
money for education by taxing the oil companies, and I think that we've all 
seen in the past what this government did with regard to the taxing of oil 
companies; it chased them all out of the province.  So, Mr. Speaker, if 
that's their solution to getting more funding for education, it's not a 
very good one. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that we recognize is the fact that we can 
always use more money.  And we listened to the member from Westmount the 
other day, talking to the Minister of Highways and complaining about the 
fact there wasn't more money for highways.  And I have a fair amount of 
respect for that member, Mr. Speaker, because he happens to be one of my 
constituents, and I'm really concerned that I might not get his vote in the 
next election, but I'm really working on him. 
 
Sure we could all use more money.  But I think that just throwing money at 
some of these problems, money that we don't have, is not the solution.  We 
need to be innovative.  We need to have creative ideas and solutions that 
will address the challenges, not only for today but also for into the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think all of us would very much like then for the Leader of 
the Opposition to lay out his plan for education and for health care in the 
1990s. 
 
I want to turn now briefly, Mr. Speaker, to the status of women.  In my 
short term as Minister responsible for the Status of Women, I've gained a 



 

 

great deal of appreciation of the diversity issues that are of interest to 
women and affect women. 
 
I must say I'm also proud of the accomplishments of our government in 
addressing these issues.  Just a few weeks ago members of cabinet met with 
representatives of major women's groups in the province, and we had a good 
opportunity to discuss some of the concerns that they have, some of the 
issues that still remain, and ones that we will be addressing in the years 
ahead. 
 
We've been involved in formal consultations with federal government on such 
things as family violence, and we've seen recent announcements by the 
federal government in this area in the last while.  We've increased funding 
for shelters for battered women over the last few years.  New shelters have 
been established.  Three new crisis lines have been funded in smaller 
centres.  And in 1990 child counsellor positions were funded in four 
shelters for the first time. 
 
Another area that I think there's been a great deal of progress is to do 
with the maintenance enforcement office, Mr. Speaker, which assists spouses 
and children to collect maintenance payments.  We've registered over 9,800 
cases and enforced 3,300 reciprocal orders from other provinces during the 
last five years. 
 
In March of this year, Mr. Speaker, a gender-equity policy was established 
by the Department of Education to promote the equitable participation of 
girls and women in the province's kindergarten to grade 12 system. 
 
(1100) 
 
By the end of 1990 over 50,000 Saskatchewan citizens had joined the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and some 80 per cent of those members are women, 
Mr. Speaker, providing benefits for people who did not have that 
opportunity before this administration came into power. 
 
The Child Care Act and regulations were proclaimed in December 1990, and 
this is the first Act in Saskatchewan specifically dealing with child-care 
services. 
 
The Saskatchewan Women's Advisory Council continues to advise government on 
a wide range of issues concerning Saskatchewan women.  The council 
introduced a brochure, PARTNERS for the FUTURE, which encourages women to 
be involved in decision-making processes of the province by becoming active 
on boards, councils, and commission.  The Women's Secretariat integrates 
issues affecting women into government's planning and policy department, 
and it also provides public awareness of issues affecting women. 
 
One of the areas that I think that we provided very good suggestions and 
input is through a news-letter being put out by the secretariat entitled 
Focus, sent to over 9,000 women and organizations.  And in recent editions 
it has highlighted the family, science and technology, diversity of 
careers, and women in the community.  This publication includes profiles of 
Saskatchewan women as well as information on programs and services. 



 

 

 
The secretariat produced and distributed to all high schools an exciting 
and dynamic video, Focus on your Future.  This multi-image production put 
together by Saskatchewan people right here in Saskatchewan encourages young 
people to start thinking about and planning for their careers.  One of the 
secretariat's recent initiatives is the development of the Saskatchewan 
Women's Directory.  This publication, in its final stages, answers the need 
for a comprehensive source of information about programs and services of 
interest to women. 
 
These are just some of our government's many accomplishments over the last 
year as we work towards the full participation of women in all aspects of 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to my own constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair 
in the city of Saskatoon.  I wanted to talk about the continuing hypocrisy 
of the New Democratic Party and particularly the leader of the NDP, the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale when he talks about his undying support 
for Saskatoon. 
 
The NDP has tried to cultivate a reputation for concern and compassion, 
especially on urban issues.  But let's look at the leader's own riding of 
Saskatoon Riversdale, Mr. Speaker.  Let's take a good look at it.  In over 
20 years of representation, what has the hon. member done for his own 
constituency?  What has he done, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I would urge anyone in Saskatchewan to tour Saskatoon Riversdale to see the 
results of the opposition leader's tenure for themselves.  It's really not 
much of a legacy, Mr. Speaker.  Let's look at his contribution to the city 
generally, and one must look very, very hard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sturdy Stone Building, the Sturdy Stone Building, Mr. 
Speaker.  Is that it?  Here is a career politician paid $l million in 
government salary and probably eligible for a pension in excess of a 
million dollars over the course of his career, and this is the best he can 
do, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this is a dismal record by anyone's 
standards.  And I ask the people of Saskatoon, is this the kind of 
performance you expect from a million dollar man? 
 
By contrast, Mr. Speaker, let's have a look at what this government and 
this Premier has been able to accomplish over the past nine years.  How 
about Saskatchewan Place and its tremendous contribution to the quality of 
life we enjoy in Saskatoon?  And that's in my constituency, Mr. Speaker.  
Whether it's sporting events like the world hockey championships, the 
Memorial Cup, the Brier, the Scott Tournament of Hearts, Canadian figure 
skating championships, the Saskatchewan Storm, none of this would have been 
possible without Saskatchewan Place. 
 
What about the trade shows and conventions that have come to Saskatoon as a 
result of Saskatchewan Place?  What about the tremendous entertainment 
events that Saskatchewan Place has attracted?  The economic activity this 
generates is worth millions of dollars to the local economy and is a great 
source of pride for the people of Saskatoon. 



 

 

 
And what did the Leader of the Opposition do to enhance the quality of life 
in Saskatoon during his time in government, Mr. Speaker?  I'll tell you 
what he did.  He built the Sturdy Stone centre, Mr. Speaker, but he didn't 
build much else. 
 
Let's look at the university.  We've built a new $17 million geology 
building, a new $92 million College of Agriculture building, a new cancer 
clinic, an addition to the Royal University Hospital, a major expansion at 
Innovation Place, and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let's look at health care.  Along with the cancer clinic and the Royal 
University Hospital, we built a new City Hospital, a major addition to St. 
Paul's Hospital and the new Parkridge Centre.  Mr. Speaker, health has been 
our number one spending priority in every year since we took office, and we 
have a health-care system that is rivalled by no one. 
 
Again I ask, Mr. Speaker, what has the million dollar man from Saskatoon 
Riversdale done for his constituency or for the city?  Well he built the 
Sturdy Stone centre.  And that's all he built, Mr. Speaker.  Members 
opposite had 10 years of government in the '70s, and what did they do for 
the people of Saskatoon?  Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, absolutely 
nothing.  Ten years of some of the best economic times we have seen in 
Saskatchewan and they didn't build a thing. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition was too busy building the land bank and the 
family of Crown corporations to worry about his constituency.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale talks a good game, but what 
has he actually done to earn the million dollars the taxpayers of this 
province have paid him?  He built the Sturdy Stone centre, his lonely 
monument to a quarter-century on the government's payroll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has gone to bat for the people of Saskatoon 
time and time again.  We built world class health and education facilities.  
We've helped to develop a thriving manufacturing sector in our city.  We've 
helped to develop Innovation Place, one of the largest high-tech research 
parks in the world.  And we've been dedicated to the area of research and 
development, Mr. Speaker.  In fact since 1985, we've helped more than 50 
companies and research institutions by providing $76 million for over 500 
research and development projects in the city of Saskatoon alone through 
the agriculture and development fund. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on but I think the people of Saskatoon get 
the picture.  It's not hard to see who really cares about Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying to all members of this Assembly 
and to the people of Saskatchewan that this budget sets out a specific, 
well-defined plan for development of our province in the 1990s -- not like 
the NDP with no definite plan, Mr. Speaker.  It is a plan that focuses on 
fiscal restraint and recovery by stabilizing and strengthening our economic 
base while emphasizing the maintenance of our world class health and 
education systems.  It's a plan that challenges government to become more 
efficient and . . . 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I think that the member for Regina 
North West will have his opportunity to speak.  The member for Regina North 
West, now I ask you, just settle down.  I won't ask you to stand up and 
apologize, but I just ask you to settle down and allow the Minister of 
Education to proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I know that the member 
from Regina was interrupting, so I'll just highlight again what this 
government's plan is. 
 
Its focus is on fiscal restraint and recovery by stabilizing and 
strengthening our economic base while emphasizing the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've just asked the hon. member for Regina 
North West at least two times to refrain from interrupting.  Now I'm going 
to ask you, sir, to rise and apologize for not heeding the instructions of 
the Chair. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, the plan that this government has put 
forward is one that's designed for the 1990s and for the 21st century.  We 
want to ensure not only that our boys and girls are going to get the proper  
 Deducation programs that they will need, but we also have to ensure that 
people going into our post-secondary institutions also receive the training 
and instruction that they're going to need to cope and adapt to the changes 
of the 21st century. 
 
We also have to look at the economic situation, Mr. Speaker, because 
without a very vibrant economic system in this province, we will not have 
the money to put into health and education programs.  We have a very, very 
clear plan, Mr. Speaker.  We understand that the challenges facing 
government today are to be more efficient and frugal.  We also have to 
challenge the Saskatchewan people to work together with government to build 
and to diversify.  Mr. Speaker, we can only be successful if we meet the 
challenge of the global market-place head on. 
 
We must be forward-looking and forward-thinking.  We must believe in 
ourselves and in our ability to achieve the goals that we set for 
ourselves.  The official opposition answers the call with long dark 
speeches of doom and gloom.  Mr. Speaker, doom and gloom serves no positive 
purpose and achieves nothing of value.  We must be aggressive in our 
efforts to expand Saskatchewan's industrial base.  We cannot continue to 
depend on agriculture; we must diversify to be successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you see the plan that has been set out by this government 
very, very clearly, when we talk about community development bonds, when we 
talk about Fair Share Saskatchewan and the long-term safety net programs in 
the agricultural industry -- Mr. Speaker, that forms the basis of economic 
recovery in our province. 
 
As our rural communities and our agricultural base strengthen, the benefits 



 

 

will be felt by people in towns and cities all across this province.  If we 
continue to diversify and look for new opportunities and access to 
international markets and to create new markets at home, the 1990s will be 
an exciting decade for Saskatchewan.  The challenge of the decade is in 
front of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most important ingredients in the recipe for 
success in Saskatchewan is education.  Without educational excellence, 
success in today's world is not possible.  Saskatchewan people have always 
understood this, and they always supported the goal of building and 
maintaining a world class education system in our province. 
 
This budget builds on that goal, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members of the 
Assembly to support it.  I certainly will not be voting for the amendment, 
but I will be supporting the motion on the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education just asked all 
members of the House to support the budget, and I would comment that 
members opposite can scarcely even speak to the budget, their own creation. 
 
As I listen to the defence of this budget or an explanation of the budget, 
I haven't heard it.  I must admit, Mr. Speaker, in all frankness and 
honesty and to his credit, that thus far, of all the speakers I've heard, 
the Minister of Education has dwelt more with the budget than virtually any 
previous speaker on that side.  In fairness to him, he has devoted a 
reasonable amount of time to the budget and to the work of the government 
and hasn't dwelt on past history. 
 
But again in his speech, Mr. Speaker, we saw what was symptomatic of the 
malaise that has set in with the present government these last number of 
years.  The Minister of Education said about 15 minutes ago that he was 
going to talk about his constituency in Saskatoon.  And then what did he 
do?  He launched into an eight or nine minute diatribe about the Leader of 
the Opposition and the constituency of Riversdale in Saskatoon.  And he 
didn't talk about his own constituency.  And, Mr. Speaker, this is why 
people can't believe this government. 
 
I mean, there we had it typified, or exemplified within the last few 
minutes.  The minister says one thing, that he's going to talk about his 
own constituency and he goes on a diatribe about the Leader of the 
Opposition in the Riversdale constituency and makes no sense at all. 
 
So I was a little bit disappointed in that.  I was disappointed in the 
minister because he had been, as I said earlier, relatively speaking on the 
right track prior to that point.  But again, it only exemplifies the 
malaise that they say one thing and they do the opposite on the other side 
of the speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to speak to the budget and the government's plan 
very deliberately or directly, and I'm going to be referring to that plan 
as it appeared in the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix and in numerous 



 

 

Saskatchewan newspapers, an advertisement that's put in there from the 
Department of Finance bearing the minister's name entitled "Saskatchewan's 
1991-92 Budget: CHOICES: Preserving the Saskatchewan Way of Life". 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am certain that you've probably seen this particular 
advertisement as most people in Saskatchewan will have if they've read 
their newspapers.  And it outlines a three-year, six-point plan.  And to 
date I don't believe I've heard anyone on the opposite side talk about the 
six points in this plan. 
 
(1115) 
 
I want to talk about the six points.  If they don't want to talk about the 
government's budget, I want to talk about it.  I want to talk about their 
six-point plan, and I want to point out to people what this plan is really 
all about. 
 

 1.Fair Taxation. 
 
 There will be no tax increases for three years. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an out-and-out, bald-faced, misleading 
distortion.  It's a half-truth to say there will be no tax increases for 
three years because Saskatchewan people, with the implementation of the 
provincial GST, are going to see the single biggest tax increase in all of 
Saskatchewan's history, in all of Saskatchewan's history. 
 
And I ask, Mr. Speaker, when they announced point number one in their plan 
-- fair taxation, there'll be no tax increases for three years -- who are 
they trying to fool?  Who are they trying to fool?  Saskatchewan people are 
being taxed to death.  They're fleeing this province to do their shopping 
in North Dakota and in Alberta.  There's hardly a soul in Saskatchewan that 
doesn't know that this isn't true -- that there will be no tax increases.  
They know it only too well. 
 
And this provincial GST announced in this budget is a disaster for this 
province.  And fair taxation, Mr. Speaker, fair taxation is point number 
one.  I want to point, Mr. Speaker, to the provincial budget that was 
tabled Monday night, the budget documents, the spending estimates.  And I 
refer now to page number 8, where the government indicates that it will be 
receiving $168 million more in sales tax in this next year because of this 
provincial GST.  And they talk about fair taxation in their newspaper 
article about the budget.  $168 million is going to be taken out of the 
pockets of Saskatchewan people or consumers by means of this provincial 
GST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another way of putting it, that means for every man, woman, 
and child in Saskatchewan, the Minister of Finance has to pick up an extra 
$168 per person to pay for this tax increase.  And I talked to one of my 
constituents last weekend as I was going door to door on O'Neil Crescent in 
Saskatoon Sutherland constituency.  Her name was Debbie, and she was a 
young waitress who told me that when the federal GST was implemented on 
January 1, she noticed a noticeable decline in her wages, although she had 



 

 

forgotten the details, the precise figures, it having been three months 
ago. 
 
But she did talk about the implementation of the provincial GST that 
happened April 1, and said that her tips from patrons have fallen from $70 
a night to $50 a night.  And the simple fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is 
that when people go to pay for their meal, when their bill is presented, 
she says more and more patrons of the restaurant are not leaving a tip.  
They're using the money that they would use for a tip to pay for the 
provincial GST. 
 
And this is taking money out of a young woman's pocket who can scarcely 
afford it.  This is her major source of income; as far as I know, her only 
source of income. 
 
And it's going to take more and more money out of Saskatchewan people's 
pockets when they pay for children's clothes, not only restaurant meals, 
and utility bills and reading material and books, and it's really a tax on 
knowledge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people say consistently that they are being taxed to death and 
buried in debt.  This is not a fair tax, Mr. Speaker.  This isn't a tax 
that's based on ability to pay.  This is an unfair tax and it's a 
regressive tax and this provincial GST is going to destroy the very social 
fabric of this province, the economic underpinnings of this province as it 
takes money out of circulation by way of people going to Minot to do their 
shopping or to Lethbridge or the black market, the underground economy, as 
people attempt to circumvent paying the provincial GST.  It will drag the 
Saskatchewan economy down and drive consumer spending out of the province 
and drive businesses into bankruptcy. 
 
This provincial GST is unjustifiable, Mr. Speaker.  I say it's 
unjustifiable, looking in the government's own spending estimates and their 
revenue estimates, when oil revenues are going to be going down by $48 
million. 
 
Now how can that be, Mr. Speaker?  How can this government give tax breaks 
to oil companies at the same time when it's going to implement the GST and 
pull $168 million out of consumer pockets?  It's unjustifiable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this provincial GST is also unnecessary.  If this government 
would only get together its waste and eliminate it, its mismanagement -- if 
that would come to an end, we wouldn't have to have a provincial GST. 
 
This will do nothing to preserve the Saskatchewan way of life.  I say the 
only way to preserve the Saskatchewan way of life is to make the choice to 
axe the tax, and that will come with a New Democratic government who will 
open the books and will get rid of the tax and will end the waste and the 
patronage and the mismanagement that has characterized this government.i 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Point number two in the government's budget, its choices, 



 

 

its preserving of the Saskatchewan way of life: 
 

 2. More Effective and Efficient Government 
 
 Controls on internal spending will be tightened.  Restrictions will 

continue to apply to purchases, travel and hiring.  Further streamlining 
within government departments will continue. 

 
Mr. Speaker, more effective and efficient government.  Now who would 
believe this promise from this government, Mr. Speaker, when this very 
newspaper ad cost the public $54,000 for this ad and the hundred and one 
other placements that are coming across Saskatchewan newspapers? 
 
This is a question of priorities, Mr. Speaker.  This government isn't only 
spending $54,000 to put these ads in the newspaper.  When they say internal 
spending will be tightened, restrictions will continue on purchasing, this 
government has also made the choice in connection with this very budget to 
produce an auxiliary budget document called CHOICES: Preserving the 
Saskatchewan Way of Life.  The same sort of song sheet.  If this is the 
song sheet, the newspaper article, this is the hymnal from which it was 
taken. 
 
And it goes on for 57 pages, printed in blue ink at a cost of $160,000 to 
justify this government's choices -- $160,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have here $160,000 spent on the hymn-book and $54,000 
spent on the song sheet, which is politically motivated.  It's political 
propaganda.  And if they're serious, as they say, on the song sheet, item 
number two, about more effective and efficient government, you'd think 
they'd eliminate this kind of spending and save taxpayers a quarter of a 
million dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, we are talking about priorities.  We are 
talking about choices.  We're talking about preserving the Saskatchewan way 
of life.  And in this budget document, in the Estimates, we'll see, the 
public will know that you can't find the government's historic commitment 
of $200,000 to the Toxicology Research Centre at the University of 
Saskatchewan because it's been eliminated.  $200,000, Mr. Speaker, that has 
been there for the better part of the last decade -- hasn't been increased, 
but it's always been there -- to their credit, Mr. Speaker.  Last year 
there was a one-shot, $100,000 heaping of the measure for the toxicology 
centre, to the government's credit.  This year, it's all gone. 
 
The government has made choices about cutting the Toxicology Research 
Centre at the University of Saskatchewan, and I say it's an outrageous 
choice.  At a time when environmental concerns are all the more important, 
that we don't fund the ability of the scientific community here in 
Saskatchewan to do toxicological work, I think we're in trouble. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't only extend to that.  The quarter of a million 
dollars that was spent on promulgating information about this budget in 



 

 

producing the choices, hymn-book and song sheet, that money could have been 
used to fund the toxicology centre at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan). 
 
Another way of looking at it, even if people aren't concerned about 
toxicology research, is to look at the cut that was made to the 
Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation.  There we saw, Mr. 
Speaker, again a funding cut of $200,000 for overseas relief and 
development work to help people like the Kurdish refugees or those people 
who are starving in Africa.  And, Mr. Speaker, I know that I speak for the 
churches of Saskatchewan.  I know that they do not like this choice.  Where 
there is a quarter of a million dollars that can go to government 
advertising, but when it comes to dealing with hungry people, with people 
in dire need, the choice isn't made. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan all right.  They're 
making choices.  But it's the wrong plan and they're making the wrong 
choices, and they have the wrong priorities for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Now I want to get back to the song sheet in the newspaper. 
 

 3. Reasonable Wage Guidelines. 
 
 Guidelines to restrict public sector wage increases to four per cent were 

announced in January 1991.  These restrictions, for both government 
agencies and Crown corporations, will be further restricted to two per 
cent commencing in October 1991 through to 1993. 

 
Nothing but cheap talk, Mr. Speaker.  This point number three, reasonable 
wage guide-lines, is nothing but cheap talk.  I say, worse than that, it's 
an insult to the people of Saskatchewan when this government can't get its 
own House in order and eliminate some of the bloated cabinet and 
legislative secretaries.  There are no reasonable wage guide-lines being 
imposed there.  There's no fat being cut there. 
 
In Executive Council, Mr. Speaker, in the Premier's office, while 221 civil 
servants across government departments are cut, how many cuts take place in 
Executive Council in the Premier's office?  Only one, only one. 
 
And is it a high-paid political advisor making 70 or 80 or $90,000 dollars 
a year in the Premier's office, Mr. Speaker?  No, it's not one of those.  
That position was a clerical position and it was vacant at that.  And this 
government has the audacity and the gall to put in their song sheet in the 
newspapers and talk about reasonable wage guide-lines.  This is scandalous.  
This is the stuff that scandal is made of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say that this budget and its talk of reasonable wage guide-lines is 
utterly unreasonable.  And need I mention, Mr. Speaker, the wage 
guide-lines that are in place for Mr. Graham Taylor or Mr. Bob Andrew or 
Mr. Chuck Childers?  I don't even need to give the details of that; the 
Saskatchewan people know the facts of the matter so well. 



 

 

 
(1130) 
 
A plan all right, Mr. Speaker.  This government has a plan all right, a 
six-point plan, and point number three is reasonable wage guide-lines on 
the backs of working people.  But when it comes to continued waste and 
patronage and mismanagement at the very heart and centre of the government 
itself, there is no restraint at all. 
 

 4. Achievable Deficit Targets. 
 
 The provincial government will eliminate the deficit and present a 

balanced budget by 1993-94. 
 

What an outrageous, preposterous claim.  This is absolutely goofy, from the 
government that has bankrupt this province and buried us in debt. 
 
The interest, Mr. Speaker, on this provincial debt is the third largest 
single expenditure of the Government of Saskatchewan.  And every day, the 
people of Saskatchewan, with their tax dollars, will pay one and a half 
million dollars in interest charges alone on this provincial debt and 
they'll have nothing to show for it. 
 
Another day older and deeper in debt -- buried in debt, buried in debt, Mr. 
Speaker, by this government.  And it isn't as if it hasn't had an 
opportunity to do something about it.  This is now the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) government's 10th straight budget; it's also the 10th 
successive deficit budget.  That's why we're buried in debt. 
 
 DNow, Mr. Speaker, it isn't as if we haven't had promises before.  I mean, 
this point number four in their song sheet in the newspaper sounds pretty 
good.  The provincial government will eliminate the deficit and present a 
balanced budget by '93-94.  It sounds pretty good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the 1986 provincial budget, the Finance minister, the member from 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden promised them to achieve a balanced budget within five 
years.  Yes, it was coming, he said.  And that deficit forecast for that 
year was out by 217 per cent -- no closer to balancing the budget than for 
the man on the moon to come down and eat soup here in Regina. 
 
And they're back again, Mr. Speaker, they're back again.  The Minister of 
Finance is back again this year with a budget promise because it's an 
election year, and it's an outrageous, unbelievable, fraudulent election 
promise that they will balance the budget.  These are the people that have 
brought us 10 consecutive deficit budgets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the Premier, Mr. Speaker, who said Saskatchewan has so much going 
for it that you can afford to mismanage it and still break even.  And this 
is the guy with that kind of attitude who is going to balance the budget by 
'93-94.  That is an out and out insult to the intelligence of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and no one believes that for a minute. 
 
This deficit will never go away with this present crew in office.  They've 



 

 

had their chance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Point number five, Mr. Speaker, in this newspaper ad, "Preserving the 
Saskatchewan Way of Life: CHOICES".  Yes, this government is preserving the 
way of life. 
 

 5. Realistic Operating Grants 
 
 Over one-third of all government spending goes to school boards, 

hospitals, special-care homes and post-secondary education institutions. 
 
 In February, 1991 it was announced that grants to these partners would be 

increased by 3.5 per cent in 1991-92.  Operating grants to these partners 
will be limited to a maximum of 3.0 per cent growth in 1992-93 and 
1993-94. 

 
And that's preserving the Saskatchewan way of life?  Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that is destroying the Saskatchewan way of life.  What this government is 
doing . . .  It talks about realistic operating grants to its partners -- 
it uses the word "partners" -- in health and education, to nursing homes 
and hospitals and schools and the like. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it's freezing funding to these partners and it's 
shovelling money at it to its pals like Weyerhaeuser and Cargill.  
Shovelling buckets of money to their friends.  Their partners in health 
lose 400 jobs because funding is cut.  Their partners in education lose 300 
jobs.  But when it comes to Cargill, they can get $360 million worth of 
government grants and loan guarantees, no questions asked.  No freeze going 
into effect there. 
 
And are we any better off, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Are we any better off for 
having given this money and guaranteed this money to Cargill?  No, we're 
worse off, Mr. Speaker, because this budget song sheet in the newspaper 
itself talks about limiting grants to hospitals and nursing homes and 
schools. 
 
And to talk about Weyerhaeuser, the sweetheart deal that took place there 
-- $248 million with no money down, 30 years to pay, eight and a half per 
cent interest rates, and the province has to build 25 miles of roads and 
bridges in the northern forest area given to Weyerhaeuser, for 25 years.  
That's immoral, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That's positively immoral, that 
taxpayers have to pay for roads for Weyerhaeuser when they haven't received 
a penny back on that sale of assets worth $248 million -- the Big River saw 
mill, the Prince Albert pulp mill, the Saskatoon chemical company, and the 
better part of our northern forests.  And we still have to build roads for 
Weyerhaeuser at public expense. 
 
And then his point number five talks about realistic operating grants.  
What an insult.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say a word about the 
impact on these cuts, this limiting of funding, on a couple institutions in 
my constituency.  Sherbrooke nursing home -- one of the largest nursing 
homes in the province, certainly in Saskatoon -- because of this freezing 
of government funding that's going to preserve the Saskatchewan way of 



 

 

life, we're led to believe or we're told, has already cut a quarter of a 
million dollars from their '91-92 budget. 
 
And this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has meant staff lay-offs, non-replacement of 
staff who are on sick leave, vacation and other sorts of absent leave, 
along with reductions in their supply cost, chiselling away there.  The sum 
total of it means there are 10 less full-time equivalent staff at 
Sherbrooke nursing home. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this song sheet, the government's own plan for the 
province announced with the budget is for realistic operating grants.  The 
people at Sherbrooke nursing home know it's not realistic.  They're 
penalizing the operation of the home. 
 
And to talk about another institution in my constituency, the University of 
Saskatchewan, where the tuition fees are going to increase and 70 jobs are 
going to be let go of -- how, I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that going 
to preserve the Saskatchewan way of life?  How can that possibly preserve 
the Saskatchewan way of life? 
 
And just last weekend I was on the university campus and was told -- this 
is just one example -- of an 18-year veteran of the feed testing operation 
there in the University of Saskatchewan with his Ph.D. who is being let go; 
18 years with a Ph.D. at the University of Saskatchewan doing feed testing 
and he's being let go. 
 
I ask you how does that preserve the Saskatchewan way of life?  How does 
that help agriculture in this province? 
 
And talking about agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also have, at the 
University of Saskatchewan, an agricultural building, a monumental building 
that is sitting empty now because there's no money to operate it -- money 
that was promised, $2 million that was promised, in a letter by the 
Premier, to the university administration but now will not be delivered 
because there are no realistic operating grants for Saskatchewan 
institution.  There's chiseling on the part of the government and on the 
part of the Premier.  There are broken promises, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the sixth and final point of this government's budget 
talks about: 
 

 6. Improved Federal-Provincial Relations: 
 
 Financial arrangements between the federal and provincial governments will 

be renewed to ensure the federal government maintains its commitment to 
health, education and agriculture. 

 
Brave talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, brave, brave talk, about improved 
federal-provincial relations, improving the Saskatchewan ways of life.  
This is the biggest insult of all, that the Mulroney government is allowed 
to off-load its funding onto the backs of Saskatchewan taxpayer.  And the 
Premier of this PC government provides only excuses, postures, and 
apologizes for everything from free trade to the GST and federal 



 

 

off-loading and can even send his deputy premier, Eric Berntson, to 
patronage heaven in the Senate in Ottawa, while he still, incidentally, is 
chairperson of the PC re-election committee here in Saskatchewan, at the 
same time that he's been sent to Ottawa to see that they ram through the 
GST in the Senate. 
 
And the federal commitments to health and education and agriculture in the 
form of established program funding and transfer of money from the federal 
government -- that's dropping like flies.  There are cuts as a result in 
health -- to the Saskatchewan hearing aid plan -- in this budget.  There 
are cuts to the SAIL plan, Saskatchewan aids to independent living, in this 
budget.  There are cuts for health research, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In this budget there are increases in costs for prescription drugs.  Ten 
million dollars will be taken out of Saskatchewan taxpayers' pockets this 
year as the provincial government off-loads, gets in on the action and 
off-loads the cost of the prescription drug program on Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Hospitals are closing beds in Yorkton and Moose Jaw and Regina and 
Saskatoon.  Almost 300 beds, 400 staff laid off. 
 
And in education the educational development fund is cut by 50 per cent, 
seven and a quarter million dollars less.  Student aid is cut by $5.2 
million and there's a lame attempt to justify it by the Minister of 
Education who comes from Saskatoon and knows the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Chronic underfunding, chronic underfunding for primary 
education and secondary education and post-secondary education; and local 
school boards having to close schools and cut staff and programs.  There's 
not a person in Saskatchewan who doesn't know that that's taking place 
because it's taking place across the province, Mr. Minister of Education. 
 
And the provincial government is pulling back from funding.  It's learning 
its lessons from the federal government and there's going to be increased 
co-operation and improved federal-provincial relations.  Well sure there 
is.  They're going to both get together on the act of off-loading onto the 
backs of local municipalities and local taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn't stop with health and 
education either.  This kind of improved little cosiness with the federal 
and the provincial government, the improved relationship, we know what that 
amounts to when it comes to agriculture, when it comes to GRIP and NISA. 
 
We know that the people of Quebec will pay $18 per capita for GRIP and 
NISA; the people of Ontario will pay $30 per capita for GRIP and NISA; and 
because of this cosy little relationship between the federal government and 



 

 

the provincial government and the improved relationships with Mr. Devine 
and Mr. Mulroney, what we will have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is Saskatchewan 
taxpayers paying $164 per capita to fund GRIP and NISA. 
 
Why?  Because the Premier can't negotiate a deal.  They couldn't negotiate 
their way out of a wet paper bag.  And he allows the federal government to 
off-load the cost of agricultural funding onto the backs of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
Put another way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it amounts to this when it comes to 
agriculture: when it comes to GRIP and NISA, as over against the payments 
that are being made for agricultural support programs this past year, and 
what the payments will amount to this year for all the various partners, 
GRIP and NISA represents about a 3 per cent increase for the federal 
government; about a 35 per cent increase in costs to farmers who 
participate; and about a 365 per cent increase for the Government of 
Saskatchewan which is government taxpayers. 
 
And that's the result of this sixth and final point in the PC plan about 
improved federal-provincial relationships.  This is a real bad PC plan, as 
the member from Regina Victoria has said. 
 
I just want to close by saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, close by saying . . . 
echoing the words of one of my constituents that I talked to last Saturday, 
again on O'Neil Crescent in Saskatoon.  And he says, these guys, he says -- 
talking about the PC government -- he says these guys think they're little 
gods.  They do anything they want and they don't listen.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
that's why this government isn't going to be around very long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- On this ninth anniversary they think they're immortal.  
They think they're omnipotent.  They think they can last for ever.  But 
they can't, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they act like little gods and they 
don't listen.  And I say the time has come for Saskatchewan to have a 
government that's as good as Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And that time will come in a few months when an election is 
called and the Leader of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale, is 
elected premier of this province and begins to rebuild this province with a 
real plan that preserves the way of life here in Saskatchewan instead of 
attacking it and destroying it.  And that's why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
won't support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Right at the start I'd like 
to tell how pleased I am to have this opportunity to stand in my place 
today and speak on behalf of the people of Shellbrook-Torch River 
constituency.  I really enjoy representing them in this legislature and I 
look forward to representing them for a long time. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, as you and my colleagues here already know, I always enjoy 
adding my voice to a good debate in the House.  Well today is no different.  
In fact, as I consider the budget that we are debating and as I think back 
to some of the comments we have already heard from the members opposite, I 
think this is one debate I've looked forward to more than usual. 
 
Why would I be in such a hurry to get up and talk about the budget?  Well 
for one thing, it's a good budget.  It's a tough budget but a good budget. 
 
And I think the government and my colleague, the Minister of Finance, both 
deserve a pat on the back for the tough choices and good decisions that 
they've made with this budget.  They deserve congratulations for setting 
out a plan for all of Saskatchewan to see, a plan that is geared towards 
stabilizing our communities through things like community bonds and Fair 
Share Saskatchewan. 
 
Fair Share Saskatchewan.  You know, I have to stop there for a minute and 
go over some information that was given to me the other day.  I don't know 
how to talk about the first person on the top of my list here.  He used to 
represent the constituency of Humboldt; he now represents the constituency 
of Regina North East.  I guess he centralized himself into Regina. 
 
But this is what he said about decentralization when he was the minister of 
the Crown.  It's Hansard, February 6, 1973, page 415.  He's moved himself 
into the city now and: 
 

 It is interesting to note that of 580 formal complaints (to Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs) 405 of them originated from southern Saskatchewan; 252 
from Regina and immediate area.  This indicates the need for 
decentralization of Government services. 

 
And that comes from the now member for Regina North East who used to be the 
member for Humboldt that got scared to represent or try to represent an 
agricultural seat and tried to build a wall around himself in the city of 
Regina in a safe seat.  And I understand there's a member sitting very 
close to him that has done the same thing; he's just vacated himself from 
the rural area and moved into Regina Elphinstone . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, the member from Prince Albert says that my 
opposition is out there campaigning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Well the more he's out there, the better chance I've got. So 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What did he say about agriculture? 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Anyway, he said the same about agriculture as the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
But anyway, and here's another quote from Hansard; here's another quote 
from Hansard about decentralization.  It comes from a Mr. Vickar -- I don't 



 

 

know, does anybody in here remember Mr. Vickar? 
 
But anyway, the opposition's opposed to decentralization.  But Mr. Vickar, 
in November 17, 1975, page 42 of Hansard, says: 
 

 It is hoped that the government will promote to a greater extent the 
decentralization of government services.  Indications of this are already 
apparent in some parts of the province, and I am hoping that efforts will 
further be made to provide further services more closely to the people in 
the constituencies. 

 
And that's the end of the quote.  But I'm sure Mr. Vickar meant that they 
were going to buy as much farm land as they could and then they'd be seen 
as being government in the rural areas. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What's the point you're making? 
 
Mr. Muller: -- The point I'm making is: these people are opposed over here 
to decentralization.  And here . . . and they never did it.  They said they 
were going to do it, they said they were going to do it; they never did it.  
And now when we are going to decentralize and have done it, we have done 
it.  We put the Water Corporation into Moose Jaw, ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) into Swift Current, Crop Insurance into 
Melville, the Pension Plan into Kindersley.  We are doing it.  Those people 
said they would, and they never did.  But that's nothing new for them. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But what's the point, Lloyd? 
 
Mr. Muller: -- The point is we're moving government closer to the people.  
You people want to centralize it all in Regina, and that's the point. 
 
Another member, a Mr. Banda, I don't remember where he came from . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He came from Redberry. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Oh, was he from Redberry?  Well it's had a lot better 
representation since the 1982 election anyway than it ever had before. 
 
I'm certain that all members in this House will agree that rural 
Saskatchewan of today is a vastly different place than rural Saskatchewan 
of a few short years ago. 
 
This can be attributed to several factors.  Certainly world agricultural 
prices are high and we have benefits from this.  I should briefly like to 
deal with some of these programs implemented by the NDP government: SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) small-business loans, 
SaskTel expansion, or decentralized government services, decentralized 
government services, bringing government and government programs in contact 
with those they serve. 
 
So that's just a few of the things that . . . there's many more here that I 
could quote from.  They say one thing and they do the opposite.  They talk 
about decentralization; they never did any of it.  They see how popular it 



 

 

is in the Moose Jaws, Swift Currents, Melvilles, Kindersleys, and Kamsack, 
I understand, and it certainly will be in Shellbrook. 
 
I don't know.  Here's maybe one more I should use.  It comes from a Mr. 
Snyder.  What did he ever get in Moose Jaw?  Did he ever get anything in 
Moose Jaw, or was it him . . . Did he put the Water Corporation in Moose 
Jaw or was that . . . I think probably that was after Mr. Snyder was gone.  
And you will know I believe of the commitment of this government to 
decentralize . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order please.  Order on both sides of the 
House.  Allow the member from Shellbrook-Torch River to continue with his 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Snyder says: 
 

 You will know I believe, of the commitment of this Government to 
decentralize a number of the agencies of government . . . that it has been 
a commitment of this Government to look for ways and means to decentralize 
the operations of this Government. 

 
I don't remember him ever putting the Water Corporation in Moose Jaw.  But 
I'm sure he comes out now and speaks in favour of it because he was in 
favour of it when he was in government.  And anyway that's a few of the 
quotes from some of the members, former members and some members that are 
here today, some of the members that have centralized themselves into 
Regina. 
 
The other reason I feel so strongly about speaking in this budget debate, 
Mr. Speaker, is quite simply because I just can't sit here any longer and 
listen to the utter nonsense coming from the members opposite in response 
to the budget -- utter nonsense, Mr. Speaker, rhetoric, partisan posturing, 
and grandstanding that doesn't do an ounce of good for the people of the 
province, behaviour that they should be ashamed of.  But the thing is, Mr. 
Speaker, it's very, very easy to be in opposition. 
 
Think about it.  Think about it.  They don't have to come up with any 
solutions.  They can just criticize and say, oh we would have done it 
better.  They would have done it better, but -- going back to the 
decentralization -- they said they were going to do it, and the way they 
did it better was not to do it.  So I mean they aren't even committed to 
their own promises. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they couldn't have done it better.  Just look at their 
record during the '70s.  Those were prosperous, good times for the 
Saskatchewan economy.  And those folks over there were running around 
bragging about breaking even.  They bragged about breaking even in good 
times.  Obviously they had never heard of saving for tough times. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana says it's not a very good speech because 
she probably doesn't like the facts that are in it.  I've never accused her 
of dealing in fact.  And if you want a textbook case of how to be wasteful 
and mismanage an economy, well just look at the history books under the 



 

 

NDPs in the 1970s administration. 
 
We had high prices for our grain and decent growing conditions.  We had 
historically high prices for potash, uranium, and you name it.  Everything 
we sold was going for top dollar, Mr. Speaker.  Through the 1970s, when the 
NDP were in government, there were buckets of money flowing into provincial 
coffers.  Where did it all go?  Well they blew it, literally.  They bought 
and spent and wasted and made government fat.  They didn't save a dime for 
the tough times that were to come.  They didn't plan for the future then, 
and they refuse to plan for the future now. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it's a lot easier to be in that position than it is to 
plot a course, build a province, and make a plan for the future.  But they 
wouldn't know anything about a plan, Mr. Speaker, not a chance of that.  
Instead of forming a plan, those guys have spent all their time 
flip-flopping on any issue that comes their way. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about flip-flopping.  And I'd like to talk a 
little bit . . . I'd like to make some comments out of Hansard . . . the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale, in his answer to the 
budget speech.  On Monday last the member from Weyburn, our Minister of 
Finance, delivered his budget speech and the Leader of the Opposition of 
course gets the opportunity to comment and to adjourn debate.  So this is 
his agricultural policy. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I thought we had no agricultural policy. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Well this is his agricultural policy: 
 

 First we suggest a short-term moratorium on farm foreclosures to keep farm 
families on the land during this time of crisis.  Second, because we 
acknowledge that a moratorium, short term or otherwise, won't solve 
anything . . .  

 
I mean he  
 Dflip-flopped in the same paragraph   He flip-flopped in the same 
paragraph . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, he doesn't understand 
agriculture.  He knows moratoriums won't work but he's going to put them in 
anyway. 
 
The other thing he flip-flopped on, and he's been after us as government 
for years now to come in with some long-term programs for agriculture.  We 
need a long-term program.  I've seen him stand in his seat and say, give us 
a long-term program for agriculture so they can plan for the future.  Let 
them plan for the future. 
 
Now here's what he says in his return to the budget speech. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who says? 
 
Mr. Muller: -- This is on page 2722, the member from Riversdale, the Leader 



 

 

of the Opposition, this is what he says in return to the budget speech: 
 

 producers . . . favour an ad hoc Special Canada Grains Program type . . . 
because it is sensitive to productivity, directly puts cash in the hands 
of producers, and does not require long-term commitment. 

 
I mean, he's talked to us for years about getting a long-term program in 
place.  We come up with NISA and GRIP, working together with all the 
provinces of Canada and the federal government.  And certainly there's some 
short-term money involved with NISA and it'll be coming this summer . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The summer now.  Now it's this summer . . . 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Well it's just . . . well spring and summer.  The man from 
Regina Elphinstone is afraid to represent an agricultural seat . . . 
centralized himself into Saskatchewan, or into Regina, now knows all about 
agriculture  I mean, he couldn't stand again to run again in an 
agricultural seat so he moved in and he fenced himself in in a safe seat in 
Regina where the former premier of this province lived and worked for 
years.  Never did anything for the seat of Elphinstone and nor has the 
member that's over there now, I'm sure.  He'll look after himself in 
fencing himself in that comfortable seat.  And he's supposedly an 
agricultural-background person, but he moved into the city because he can't 
survive in a rural area.  They talk about the rural/urban split, that's 
what causes it. 
 
Anyway, in time I'll get into more detail and fully I intend to go into 
great detail, but now I'll say this, and I will direct this to the member 
from Riversdale because he appears to be a leader of a pack over there. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deserve better than what you've been throwing 
out during this budget debate.  The people of Saskatchewan deserve 
something better.  They also deserve at least one original idea from a man 
who learned the fine art of foreclosure at law school. 
 
You would like to think, Mr. Speaker, that after some 25 years of political 
life, the Leader of the Opposition would have some ideas that at least 
people could shape . . . at least took shape in the '90s, rather than using 
old policies from the '60s and '70s.  And that's what he is, he's a man of 
the '60s and '70s.  He wants to go back to the future. 
 
Well those policies didn't work then and they certainly won't work now.  
Moratoriums didn't work then and he even admits they won't work now but 
he's going to use them anyway.  I mean that's the only ideas he's got is 
the ones that won't work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that we are all trying to be more and more 
environmentally friendly.  But somebody should let those people in on 
something. 
 
And again I want to give you these helpful hints to members opposite.  You 
can recycle paper, you can recycle aluminum cans, and you can recycle 
plastic.  But please, do us all a favour and stop recycling your ideas from 



 

 

the '60s and '70s because they certainly don't work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have been grandstanding and playing 
politics for so long, they're missing something very important.  The people 
of this province are tired of your rhetoric.  They're tired of the fact 
that you complain and complain and never offer a solution that holds any 
water -- no solutions at all.  No plans, no solutions, no ideas, just 
rhetoric. 
 
They are tired of the fact that you have no plan for this province, at 
least no plan that you are willing to reveal to the public.  You won't put 
it up for public scrutiny, that's for sure.  If they have a plan, it's a 
back-room plan that they're scared of themselves, unless it's a moratorium 
that they're not in favour of. 
 
They're tired of the opposition leader with absolutely no ideas and no 
vision for Saskatchewan.  Mind you, what can you expect from a guy who 
can't decide what he really thinks about anything. 
 
I say to the members opposite, they are tired of your old ideas, your old 
ties to the unions.  Quite simply, they're tired of you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you've got to come up with something better than we'll do what 
the Tories do, only we'll do it better.  That's the only line they've got.  
We'll do what the Tories do but we'll do it better.  Well they proved that 
with the decentralization.  They were going to do it but it took us to do 
it better; at least we went out and done it.  They talked about it and 
never did it.  The people on this side of the House don't buy that.  The 
people of this province don't believe it either. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition and the Finance critic and Energy critic and 
all those people over there that are going to solve all the province's 
economic problems by milking the oil and gas industry for all its worth -- 
you all have to do a lot better than that. 
 
You know, when I hear the lame-duck excuses the members opposite try to 
pass off as real solutions, something very interesting comes to mind.  For 
some reason I picture the Leader of the Opposition as the leader of a 
buffalo jump.  And we all know what happened to that kind of a herd. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend some time today talking directly 
about the budget, the efforts of this government, and how those efforts 
have affected the constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River.  Early I talked 
about the plan that our government has for the province of Saskatchewan.  
Some of that plan was put forward in the budget in this session but the 
plan itself has been in motion since 1982. 
 
Right from the beginning we were for growth and development and for 
strengthening the traditional base of our economy -- agriculture.  We were 
for building our communities and for encouraging people to pull together 
and make things happen in their towns. 
 
I know in my own constituency I have seen the positive change that has 



 

 

taken place since 1982.  I've seen 38 small businesses in my constituency 
benefit from SEDCO assistance, 38 small businesses, Mr. Speaker.  I have 
seen homes and farms get the benefit and convenience of natural gas and 
private line service.  I've seen farmers, friends and neighbours of mine, 
helped through some of the most difficult years agriculture has faced in 
Saskatchewan.  I've seen nursing home beds built, schools renovated, and 
people able to keep their homes in a high interest-rate environment because 
of the things the government has done. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, again on Monday night, talked about high 
dollar, high interest rates, and what that was doing to our economy.  He 
stood in his place and talked about the problems of high interest rates, 
but he certainly didn't remember the high interest rates that we faced in 
the late '70s and early '80s when he was deputy premier of this province on 
this side of the House, and he would not look at any relief for 
agriculture, home owners, or business people, or anybody in this province.  
He supported the federal government in their high interest-rate policies, 
and he ignored everybody in Saskatchewan. 
 
And now he comes back and said we have to have lower interest rates.  We 
have far lower interest rates today than we ever had in 1979, '80, '81.  In 
1982 when house mortgages were 21 and 22 per cent, we guaranteed interest 
rates at thirteen and a quarter per cent for house mortgages, the same as 
it is today.  And he's saying it's too high, and he wouldn't bring them 
down that low in 1982. 
 
He ignored home owners in 1982, totally ignored them.  And thirteen and a 
quarter per cent looked pretty good to people in Saskatchewan in 1982 for 
home mortgages.  And these people now talk about high interest rates, and 
they wouldn't even try and help the home owner in Saskatchewan or a farmer 
or a small-business man bring down their interest rates. 
 
And I think that's deplorable, Mr. Speaker, that these people now have 
flip-flopped again just because they can promise anything they like from 
opposition, but they know they'll never have to live up to it because 
they're never going to be sitting over here to be able to deliver anything.  
Because they will not deliver, they haven't delivered, and they won't 
deliver. 
 
And most recently, Mr. Speaker, I've seen communities all across my 
constituency working together to attract a government agency to the 
Shellbrook-Torch River area.  Well maybe we should revive some of these old 
members that were here and wanted to decentralize Saskatchewan when they 
were in government.  Could we recycle Mr. Snyder or Mr. Banda?  I don't 
think so. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How about Mr. Vickar? 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Maybe Mr. Vickar, yes, we could maybe recycle . . . 
 
Anyway, I don't think Mr. Blakeney had much to say about . . .  Quote of 
the week, quote of the week: 
 



 

 

 The bald truth is that many New Democrats are somewhat uncomfortable about 
the serious decentralization for fear that local people will not make the 
appropriate left-wing decision. 

 
So anyway, we knew where he was coming from, Mr. Speaker.  He always has 
come from there, and I don't know where he's at now but . . . 
 
Over 50 organizations in that constituency are working together to make 
something happen in their towns and villages.  It's really been exciting to 
be out in the country and watch these people getting themselves together, 
working together, not working opposed to each other, and trying to attract 
something to the area, not necessarily directly into their town but bring 
something into the area so that they have some input in government. 
 
And that's all the plan that the PC government has had for Saskatchewan 
since day one.  They want to involve people, keep them interested in what 
we're doing and let them have their input into what we're doing. 
 
There's no denying that this province has faced real tough economic times 
over the last 10 years.  They have suffered through low prices for our 
grain, low prices for our oil, low prices for our potash and uranium, and 
practically every resource in Saskatchewan fell. 
 
And if that wasn't enough, we were faced with droughts and high interest 
rates to boot.  There was quite a lot of relief came from the provincial 
government.  There was quite a lot of interest rate relief came from this 
government, none from those other guys when they were in government.  I 
think people have to be reminded of that.  They let the interest rate rise 
way over 20 per cent and ignored the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There's no denying, Mr. Speaker, that fate had dealt Saskatchewan a tough 
economic hand.  But what is important and what the opposition over there is 
ashamed to say is that through the droughts and high interest rates and low 
prices the PC government continued to protect our way of life and build for 
our future. 
 
We protected farmers.  And certainly they forgot them; we protected.  They 
said they were going to buy their land.  We supported them in allowing them 
to keep it.  This government pumped more money into agriculture than any 
government before us.  And in addition to that, we've got billions out of 
the federal government for agriculture.  We got billions out of the federal 
government for agriculture. 
 
And certainly the Leader of the Opposition has never got a nickel out of 
the federal government for anything.  They gave a lot away I think in the 
western energy agreement and a few other things and certainly in the 
Constitution, but him and the now Liberal leader in Ottawa cooked up a few 
deals in the kitchen I think one night.  But they did it behind closed 
doors in the kitchen rather than involving people and asking them what they 
wanted as we did with Consensus Saskatchewan. 
 
(1215) 
 



 

 

We protected them.  When interest rates were putting so much pressure on 
our home owners, we were there to help.  We did help.  We brought the 
mortgage rates down to thirteen and a quarter in 1982.  They were over 21 
per cent.  You people ignored them. 
 
We encouraged development in the oil patch, and now for the first time 
Saskatchewan exports our natural gas instead of buying it from Alberta like 
the NDP did.  And now because of that, over a thousand people work in the 
oil patch compared to a couple hundred under the NDP. 
 
We put our resources and our people to work, and as a result manufacturing 
investment in Saskatchewan has grown by nearly 700 per cent in the past 
nine years.  In difficult times, manufacturing has grown 700 per cent -- 
tremendous unprecedented growth, Mr. Speaker, growth that is building and 
diversifying our economic base today so that our kids can live and work and 
make a life in Saskatchewan tomorrow. 
 
Now I know I have covered a lot of ground in my comments today, Mr. 
Speaker, but to sum up my thoughts, I'd like to say this: the government 
that you see before you, Mr. Speaker, has always been dedicated to the 
future of this province.  From the beginning we have fought to protect our 
people and build our economy.  We have achieved growth and development in 
an era of real hardship.  In short, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. 
 
What is the NDP plan, Mr. Speaker?  Moratoriums that don't work, that's the 
only plan the Leader of the Opposition came up with the other night in 
answer to the budget speech . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Your guess 
is as good as mine.  As far as I can tell, they don't even have a plan.  
That's the question I get asked most when I'm out in my seat.  What are the 
other guys going to do?  Well I don't know.  The member that's running 
against me doesn't even know what they're going to do.  But I'll give him 
this, he's honest.  He at least says he doesn't know what they're going to 
do, but give me a chance at it. 
 
He's got a leader that doesn't understand agriculture.  He doesn't know 
what they're going to do, the leader doesn't know what they're going to do.  
And the member from Saskatoon Sutherland spoke just ahead of me, I thought 
maybe he just got the new Agriculture critic position.  He was talking 
about GRIP and NISA.  He probably is more up to date on it than some of the 
critics they have now, but anyway . . . And as I said before, Saskatchewan 
and Saskatchewan people deserve a lot better than that.  They deserve a lot 
more than somebody that doesn't know what they're going to do. 
 
We have a plan and we're going to put our plan to work.  And we have our 
plan out there in front of the people.  These people opposite don't have a 
plan.  They don't have a plan.  The member from P.A. said, we don't know 
what . . . nobody knows what our plan is.  We got NISA and GRIP, we've got 
beef stabilization, we've got loans out on beef cattle, interest-free 
loans.  We've done more for agriculture.  We've helped people with interest 
rates.  And anyway, Mr. Speaker, I won't be voting for the amendment, but I 
certainly will be supporting the main motion for the member from Weyburn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to have the opportunity to participate in this budget debate.  I 
have waited somewhat patiently for this opportunity, Mr. Speaker.  As a 
student of parliamentary history, I'm sure you are aware that this 
government has set yet another parliamentary precedent.  Here we are at the 
end of April debating a budget that was introduced in February.  Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have waited a long time for this 
debate.  We are debating a budget that was introduced in February by press 
release.  And when we have the opportunity, the member from Wilkie and 
others don't seem to want to particularly debate the budget at hand, they 
want to debate everything else under the sun, but not the issues that are 
in front of us through this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Shellbrook-Torch River that just occupied the 
floor said that as he's home he hears one question.  That's peculiar, Mr. 
Speaker, because I happened to be in his neighbourhood not so long ago.  I 
happened to be in the neighbourhood of the member from Wilkie not so long 
ago and in the neighbourhood of the member from Melville.  And the 
question, Mr. Speaker, that I hear asked all over the province . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The minister from Assiniboia wants to know 
what they're asking down there because he's so rarely there. 
 
I'll tell him, Mr. Speaker.  I'll tell him, Mr. Speaker, what they're 
asking in Assiniboia and Coronach, Rockglen, and Gravelbourg is this 
question.  They're asking:  where in the world has all the money gone?  
Where has all the money gone?  Since this budget has made its official 
appearance here in the legislature, the question is everywhere.  People are 
asking: where has all the money gone?  And it's a logical question, Mr. 
Speaker.  Is it any wonder people are asking that question? 
 
People understand that this government has sold off the assets of our 
province.  They know that.  That's not a mystery.  They advertise it as 
good economic planning.  They've sold off the assets of our province.  
People know that.  People understand.  My colleague from Rosemont asked who 
have they sold it to.  Well I recall Saskatchewan Minerals wholly owned by 
the people of Saskatchewan, sold lock, stock and barrel to Toronto and 
Montreal in a secret deal -- one example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People know that they've sold off the assets.  They know, Mr. Speaker, that 
our tax rates have gone up and up and up.  And they know as well, and it's 
confirmed by this budget, that this government has heaped a mountain of 
debt on the people of Saskatchewan.  It's a logical question, Mr. Speaker: 
where has the money gone?  The assets are sold, the taxes are up and the 
debt continues to rise.  So is it any wonder people ask: where has the 
money gone? 
 
Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough, the Premier of our province may have 
given us a clue to the answer to this question, where has the money gone.  
Not so long ago, when he spoke at what will be his last Premier's banquet, 
I'm told by someone who was in attendance at the banquet, I'm told that the 
Premier said -- and some members opposite I'm sure were there and they will 
likely confirm this -- I'm told that the Premier said at his banquet: we've 



 

 

made a few mistakes; we've made a few mistakes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he didn't elaborate at the banquet about those mistakes, 
but it may well be that in that short comment there may be a clue indeed, 
to where all the money has gone.  I'd like to speculate a little about what 
the Premier may have been referring to when he said, we've made a few 
little mistakes. 
 
Now I listened carefully.  I was listening last night as the member from 
Wilkie entered the debate.  And he gave a section of his speech to the 
P-words; he was talking about P-words.  He was talking about P-words.  Well 
interestingly he talked about prosperity.  He talked about progress and he 
talked about profit. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, there was one word that he didn't inject into 
his P-section of the speech.  He did not use, I noticed he did not use the 
word, privatization.  He didn't say privatization and, Mr. Speaker, I've 
not heard the Premier of this province use that word in recent weeks. 
 
What has happened to the major economic game plan of this government?  It 
has simply been erased from the vocabulary of members and the vocabulary of 
the Premier.  Now that may be as a clue, Mr. Speaker.  I think now what the 
Premier is saying, we made a little mistake.  We sold off your potash and 
we sold off your oil and we sold off your coal and we sold off your timber.  
We sold off your sodium sulphate -- just a little mistake.  Whoops, just a 
little mistake.  And now Saskatchewan people . . . we expect Saskatchewan 
people will forget.  We should forget the mistake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder, when the Premier says we've made a few mistakes, if 
he's talking about what he's done to the Highways workers in this province.  
Remember that?  Remember when that Mr. Jim Garner said he was freeing these 
workers up to go to the private sector, an opportunity to go to the private 
sector?  They'd sold off our Highways equipment for a song; they fired the 
Highways workers -- many of whom could not find other work and hence have 
gone off to Alberta where they get now contracted to come back and build 
roads in Saskatchewan.  Our roads have gone to pot.  And I think now the 
Premier's saying, well we made just a little mistake in firing all the 
Highways workers.  Yes, just a little mistake. 
 
And what's the response in this budget?  Well, more firings in the Highways 
department.  The road construction association of Saskatchewan predicts the 
cuts will mean 2,800 fewer people working in road building and maintenance 
this summer.  The Premier says, well, little mistake.  And we're supposed 
to forget about those little mistakes. 
 
When the Premier says we've made a few little mistakes, perhaps he's 
referring to some of the campaign promises that he made.  Perhaps now he 
knows they were mistakes.  Remember the promises that were made to the 
people of Saskatchewan?  I remember this Premier saying there will never be 
a gas tax in Saskatchewan so long as I'm Premier of Saskatchewan.  He's 
still the Premier and we've got a gas tax, twice as much as we were paying 
in 1982.  I guess maybe that commitment was a little mistake. 
 



 

 

Maybe it was a little mistake when he said, I'm going to eliminate -- 
eliminate -- the sales tax. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did he? 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well he eliminated the 5 per cent sales tax and changed it 
to 7 per cent.  And this February he sends his Minister of Finance out into 
the press and announces -- what? -- the provincial goods and services tax, 
the largest tax increase in Saskatchewan's history.  Now that's from a 
promise made some time ago that we're going to eliminate the sales tax.  I 
think he thinks that commitment was a bit of a mistake. 
 
He said he was going to cut our income tax.  He said he was going to cut 
the income tax on Saskatchewan people.  That was his promise.  That was his 
promise -- we're going to cut the income tax.  And the member from Regina 
-- what's his . . . Wascana? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- The member from Regina Wascana seems to agree.  The Premier 
said he's going to cut our income tax.  He's going to cut our income tax.  
And what's happened to our income tax?  Well ask any tax-paying citizen in 
the province, ask any tax-paying citizen in the province.  We have 
something now called a flat tax, unique to Saskatchewan.  Came in at a half 
a per cent and then one and then one and a half, and now it's two.  Another 
Saskatchewan first.  He said his commitment was to cut our income tax.  I 
think he thinks that commitment maybe was a little mistake. 
 
I'm still waiting, Mr. Speaker, frankly I'm still waiting for the free 
phones for seniors.  The free phones for seniors.  My mother is still 
waiting for her free phone.  Mr. Speaker, I think maybe the Premier is now 
saying, well that campaign commitment was a little mistake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could talk about more recent commitments.  Remember the 
commitment made just a few months ago.  A factory in every town -- another 
promise, another commitment -- a factory in every town.  I heard him say 
it, I heard him say it.  There's the Minister for Economic Diversification, 
he hasn't quite produced a factory in every town just yet. 
 
I think when the Premier stood up at his banquet this year and said we've 
made a few little mistakes, he meant I shouldn't have said that.  I 
shouldn't have said a factory in every town.  Mr. Speaker, maybe when the 
Premier says we've made a few mistakes, maybe what the Premier meant is the 
budget of . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  It's Friday morning, it's 12:30, as a 
matter of fact.  It's early afternoon.  Hon. members are a bit agitated, 
probably want to go home.  One thing leads to another, and I am hearing 
some unparliamentary language at this point, and I'm going to ask hon. 
members to stop using that.  Stop using that.  It is not the kind of 
language we want in the chambers. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, when the Premier says 



 

 

we've made some little mistakes, perhaps he's . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I didn't want to apologize, but I was 
pointing out that members in this Assembly should not lie. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  The rules state 
clearly that hon. members are not to accuse other members of lying.  That's 
a clear rule.  Now the hon. member from Melville has just broken that rule.  
I'm going to ask him to rise and apologize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize.  I didn't intend to call 
anyone a liar. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm just going to ask the hon. member to rise and 
apologize without any qualifications.  Just an apology, straight apology. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I give you a straight apology. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, perhaps when the Premier, at his banquet this 
year, said we've made a few little mistakes, perhaps he was referring to 
the last pre-election budget speech and budget presentation.  Perhaps 
that's what he was referring to when he said we've made a little mistake 
because -- you recall in that pre-election budget -- a commitment was made, 
Mr. Speaker, that we're going to balance the budget of the province of 
Saskatchewan by 1991.  That's what they said. 
 
And that has turned out to be a little mistake.  And, Mr. Speaker, you 
recall in that pre-election budget before the 1986 election, the then 
minister of Finance, on behalf of the Premier, stood in the House and said, 
well the deficit this year is in the neighbourhood of $389 million -- $389 
million.  He told us that would be the deficit in 1986.  And when the 
election was over and a few months had passed, what was the true deficit 
that year?  A little mistake, $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, an $800 million 
mistake.  Now the Premier would have us just sort of forget those kind of 
little mistakes and carry on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on.  I could talk about . . . perhaps now they view 
the cut of the food subsidy to northern Saskatchewan as a mistake.  Perhaps 
they understand that the slashing of the prescription drug plan was a 
mistake.  Perhaps now the Premier will admit that the elimination of the 
school-based children's dental plan was a mistake.  Perhaps they will now 
admit that the appointment of two former cabinet ministers to plush trade 
offices was a mistake.  Perhaps now the Premier would admit that his 
undying support for Brian Mulroney and the federal Conservatives and free 
trade and the GST, perhaps now he would admit that's a mistake. 



 

 

 
Or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, he will admit that it's a mistake to force 
Saskatchewan farm families to get into GRIP and NISA long before the 
verdict on these programs is in, long before they have the kind of 
information they need.  Perhaps he'd admit that's a little mistake. 
 
Perhaps he'd say it was a mistake that Ontario and Quebec negotiated a far 
better deal for their taxpayers in terms of federal support for these 
long-term programs than did the Premier of Saskatchewan.  Perhaps he'd say 
that's a mistake.  Perhaps he'd say it's just a little mistake that 80,000 
people have left our province in the last few years.  Perhaps now he'll 
admit it's a mistake that we're spending, this government is spending $2 
million a month on government advertising.  Perhaps he'd admit it's a 
mistake that every member of the government benches, with the exception of 
one, is either a cabinet minister or an associate minister, a chair of 
committees, or a Legislative Secretary, earning extra money, Mr. Speaker.  
Perhaps he would now admit that's a mistake and perhaps he would admit that 
it's a mistake to be cutting beds from our hospitals and cutting teachers 
from our schools and cutting employment for Saskatchewan young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget which is before us today is a direct result of nine 
years of Tory mismanagement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And, Mr. Speaker, the only mistake that the people of 
Saskatchewan have made is the mistake we made when we believed them and 
entrusted them with the treasury of the province.  That is the mistake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few moments highlighting 
some of the figures from the budget under debate.  Mr. Speaker, if you turn 
to page 25 of the Budget Address delivered by the Minister of Finance in 
this House, there is the statement of total debt on the province, and 
beside the Government of Saskatchewan, the total debt in this document 
reads $4.889 billion -- 4.9, almost $5 billion debt on the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
 DI remind you, Mr. Speaker, that when these people came to office in 1982, 
this column did not exist in the budget except to show a surplus of $139 
million.  When Mr. Andrew introduced his financial statement as minister of 
Finance at that time, he showed in his statement a surplus of $139 million.  
That today, Mr. Speaker, reads in the minister's address $4.9, $5 billion 
in debt.  Every dollar of that debt heaped on the people of Saskatchewan by 
this government since they came to office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What does that mean?  Now, Mr. Speaker, I must put a caveat on what I've 
just said, because the auditor says this is not entirely accurate.  There 
should at least be another $500 million in debt here -- $555 million if you 
review the last audited statement provided by this government, March of 
last year.  The auditor's comment at the front of that statement indicates 
that the statement is out by $554 million.  So add that to this figure. 



 

 

 
And we do recall the pre-election budget of 1986.  We know that one was out 
by $800 million and so we take these figures for what they're worth.  But 
even at that, Mr. Speaker, the minister indicates we're $5 billion in debt 
as a province. 
 
And what does that mean, Mr. Speaker?  What does it mean?  Well if you turn 
to page 55 of the Estimates document, this is the page in the estimates -- 
again a page that did not exist when these people came to office -- the 
page that describes what it costs the people of Saskatchewan to service 
this massive debt.  On this page you will read, Mr. Speaker, total 
expenditures to finance the public debt.  And this I remind you is simply 
to pay the interest charges on this debt. In this year we will spend 
$499,729,100 -- $500 million interest payments on this debt. 
 
Do you understand, Mr. Speaker, and members of the House, do you understand 
what this means?  It means that the taxpaying citizens of Saskatchewan pay 
their taxes to pay off these interest payments to the bankers in New York, 
the bankers in Tokyo, the bankers of Geneva.  We're paying this money into 
interest payments that exit our economy into the hands of the bankers and 
the bond dealers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am troubled that if not already, we very soon, I think, will 
be beholden to these financial institutions.  If something isn't done about 
this pattern of deficit financing and debt, we will be beholden to those 
bankers and bond dealers of New York.  The first claim on the tax dollar in 
Saskatchewan now is to the bank because we are mortgaged to the hilt.  We 
are on the verge, Mr. Speaker, of bankruptcy in this province. 
 
What does this mean?  What does a $500 million a year interest payment 
mean?  It means we have $500 million less to provide services for people.  
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, what we could do if we had this $500 million, if 
these people hadn't amassed this $5 billion deficit. 
 
There wouldn't be quotas at the universities.  There wouldn't be cut-backs 
in hospital beds.  We could find meaningful ways to deal with the real 
poverty that exists in this province.  We could find meaningful ways and 
long-term ways to support suffering farm families and the farm families who 
are in need.  We could have an economy that's moving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don't have this $500 million because these people gave us a 
$5 billion debt and that $500 million now leaves the province, leaves the 
province to the bankers and the bond dealers. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what does this debt mean?  It means that 
the very first responsibility of a new government must be to restore fiscal 
integrity to the Government of Saskatchewan.  It means, Mr. Speaker, that 
we need a government in this province that will cut the frills and pay the 
bills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And, Mr. Speaker, it means we need a government in this 



 

 

province that views the treasury as a trust and not as a trough, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And it means, Mr. Speaker, we need a government that will 
go to Ottawa and stand up for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And it means, Mr. Speaker, we need a government in 
Saskatchewan who can get this economy working again as the best tool to 
fight the deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I do want to say a word about the impact of 
this budget on the city of Moose Jaw, the city that I and the member from 
Moose Jaw North are proud to represent. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, delivered to us in February, of course you 
recall, this budget means we are losing beds in our hospitals when they are 
desperately needed in our community.  We are losing jobs from our hospitals 
when those people are desperately needed to provide care.  It's a double 
tragedy, Mr. Speaker.  Not only is there the need, we have the people who 
have given their life's vocation to the care of others who are being put 
out of work in our city. 
 
We are seeing cuts to our schools in Moose Jaw.  We've seen cuts to STI 
(Saskatchewan Technical Institute) in Moose Jaw, to the SIAST campus.  It 
means that our city council will have little option, because of the 
cut-backs from the province, to increase property taxes or to drastically 
cut services. 
 
The lack, the complete lack of any employment strategy in this budget means 
that even more of our Moose Jaw young people are going to have to leave 
this province, Mr. Speaker.  And this budget means that seniors in my 
constituency, seniors in the city of Moose Jaw are paying more today for 
their prescription drug plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the seniors of Moose Jaw South and the 
seniors of Moose Jaw North were interested last night to hear the review of 
the cuts by the member from Saskatoon Centre as she pointed out what this 
budget does to the seniors of our province.  It means, Mr. Speaker, this 
budget, that every citizen in Moose Jaw will be paying more and more and 
more in tax. 
 
Why?  To cover up for the mismanagement and the waste of this government, 
Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm confident in saying that I speak for 
the majority of my constituents that want their member to come to this 
House and oppose this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say a specific word about a specific 
line in this budget document.  If, Mr. Speaker, you turn to the budget for 
the Department of Agriculture and to page 22, you will find line 15 which 
is described as "Matching grants for international aid." 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is perhaps the most unkind cut of all in this budget.  
This is perhaps the saddest of all the records of this government.  Mr. 
Speaker, grants for international aid in the provincial budget have always 
been a very, very small, small, teeny-weeny portion of the budget. 
 
In the mid-'70s, the churches of Saskatchewan, volunteer relief 
organizations, people like Oxfam, World Vision, Mennonite Central 
Committee, the United Church of Canada, the Lutheran Church, the Anglican 
Church, the central Baptist union -- these people formed a partnership with 
the Government of Saskatchewan, a partnership to assist those in our world 
most in need.  We did it through a program called the matching grants 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the years the generosity of Saskatchewan people through 
their churches, through relief organizations, through development 
organizations, have contributed millions of dollars to this effort. 
 
I want to review some of the funding.  In 1974, through the volunteer 
organizations, $995,000 was raised.  Mr. Speaker, by 1982 the people of 
Saskatchewan generously were giving to the neediest in our world, through 
this program, $3.5 million.  Mr. Speaker, by 1990-91 it is estimated that 
the people of Saskatchewan through volunteer givings will provide $6.365 
million. 
 
And recall, Mr. Speaker, these are tough times.  No one debates that.  But 
in tough times, Saskatchewan people respond.  We are a generous people in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, we are a caring people. 
 
(1245) 
 
I talk about the partnership now.  I talk about the partnership. In 1974-75 
the Government of Saskatchewan contributed $142,000 to this program.  By 
1982, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan was contributing $2 
million to this program.  These people got elected in 1982, what did they 
do?  They immediately cut it to $1 million. They slashed it in half.  Then 
they lowered it to 900,000. Then they lowered it to 800,000.  In last 
year's budget I couldn't believe it when this government cut the matching 
grants program from 850 to 450,000.  I couldn't believe it, Mr. Speaker. 
And they bragged about it.  And, Mr. Speaker, this year I opened the budget 
documents of the province of Saskatchewan to find the matching grant 
program cut from 425 to $200,000 -- $200,000 is the extent of the 
commitment of this government to the poorest of the poor in our world.  
It's a shame, Mr. Speaker, it's a shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are tough times, Mr. Speaker, nobody debates that.  
These are tough times.  But times are not as tough for us as they are for 
the children on the mountains in Turkey, the Kurdish peoples on the 



 

 

mountains in Turkey.  They're not as tough as they are for the people in 
Costa Rica picking up after an earthquake.  They're not as tough as they 
are for the people in the Horn of Africa . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. The member from Assiniboia would like to contribute to the debate.  Well 
perhaps the member from Assiniboia can explain, Mr. Speaker, a choice that 
was made by this government. 
 
This morning my colleague from Saskatoon University indicated that this 
document, this political propaganda that came with the budget, this 57-page 
document, this thing called CHOICES, 57 pages of political propaganda . . . 
after the budget speech there was literally hundreds of copies of these 
things left out in the lobby that nobody bothered to pick up because 
everybody knows what it is -- political propaganda. 
 
My colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland today in the House reveals that this 
thing cost $150,000 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Sixty. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- One hundred and sixty thousand dollars to print pure 
political propaganda.  And then they take out ads in the newspapers to 
advertise it that cost another $54,000.  That's $204,000 spent on political 
propaganda, but we don't have money for the children that are on the 
mountains in Turkey, for the Horn of Africa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where in the world . . . how in the world have the priorities 
here gone so wrong?  How have the priorities gone so wrong?  Mr. Speaker, 
why does this government betray the partnership with Saskatchewan people 
through their churches and through their relief organizations?  How have 
the priorities gone so wrong, Mr. Speaker?  And I look forward with 
anticipation to the opportunity when the Minister of Agriculture must come 
into this House for his estimates and must defend this cut into the budget. 
 
This is not, Mr. Speaker, in my view, what Saskatchewan people want; this 
is not what Saskatchewan people want. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'll be honest.  I am not exactly sure what 
the member from Rosemont said, but it sounded not very nice from this 
vantage point.  If in fact you are guilty of making any kind of a remark 
that isn't parliamentary, I ask you to not do it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, this is not what Saskatchewan people want.  
Saskatchewan people are a generous people.  Saskatchewan people are a 
caring people, and in tough times they understand.  This is not what 
Saskatchewan people want. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of this alone, because this budget has moved 
so far, so far, from the reality of Saskatchewan people, how could anyone 
of us support it?  How could anyone of us support a budget that is so out 
of tune with the Saskatchewan way, the Saskatchewan spirit, the 
Saskatchewan generosity?  How could any member in this House support this 
kind of cut and this kind of budget?  How could anyone support a budget 
where the priorities are so skewed as they are here? 



 

 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against this budget because it makes the 
wrong choices.  I vote against this budget because it does not enjoy the 
confidence of the people of Saskatchewan.  I vote against it because this 
government has no mandate left whatsoever, this government has no 
credibility left whatsoever.  And, Mr. Speaker, I guess I vote against it 
most of all because this budget, in the springtime of the province, offers 
not a sign of hope to our people.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 
the amendment introduced by the member from Saskatoon Centre.  Mr. Speaker, 
I will support that amendment because I know there is a better way.  I know 
that this province has a place in the nation and in the world, a place we 
will find again.  I know there is no better place in which to raise a 
family than in the province of Saskatchewan.  I know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I know that we can meet the needs of our 
people and still be generous in the world.  And I know, Mr. Speaker, that 
the spirit of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan way, is still strong.  It'll 
take time, Mr. Speaker.  It'll take time, but there is a better way.  
There's a better way than this budget and this government would take us.  
And, Mr. Speaker, if the people of Moose Jaw South grant to me the 
privilege once again to serve in this legislature, I look forward to 
building that better way under the leadership of the member from 
Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to enter 
this debate this afternoon on the budget that has been brought down by my 
member, the member from Weyburn, the Minister of Finance. 
 
It's also a pleasure for me, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate you on being the 
first elected Speaker of this Assembly.  It is an outstanding person in an 
outstanding job.  And I know you've done a good job over the years, and I 
feel very confident in the future you'll do the same. 
 
I also want to say to the members of this Legislative Assembly that the 
last eight years that we have been here, or nine years that we have been 
here as government, it has been a pleasure to serve, certainly as a 
minister, and to serve my constituency well.  I believe it's been an 
opportunity for me to meet with people, not only in my constituency but 
across the province. 
 
I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about the province and about the 
Department of Rural Development, about the government, the role we play, 
the plan we have for the future of Saskatchewan.  And the plan started back 
a long time ago, Mr. Speaker, when . . . under Rural Development 
particularly on the area that I've been responsible for and we put together 
a plan of road rationalization, of rural development corporations, of 
economic development committees.  We brought also into there . . . we've 
had ADD (agriculture development and diversification district) committees.  
We've got RMs (rural municipality) and urban communities working together. 



 

 

 
There's been a lot go on over the last three or four years, just to give 
you a breakdown -- because I know it's very close to 1 o'clock -- but just 
to give you a brief breakdown of some of the things that have happened 
where municipalities, urban and rural together, working together, have 
created new industries in this province.  In the last 15 months, Mr. 
Speaker, there has been 160 new industries created in this province because 
urban and rural municipalities, funded by different departments of 
government and by the local people, have put together . . . have worked 
together to create these types of opportunities. 
 
I give you one example.  In Kelvington-Wadena constituency, in fact in 
Kelvington is the example.  The agrologists out there worked with the 
community.  They put together what they call a peola chip, where they use 
peas and make it into a flour and then they dip it in canola oil.  They got 
a name for it -- Kris-p Chips, very unique.  They have, in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, started the manufacture of it, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, over 
the next three or four years we'll probably end up with about 100 to 150 
new jobs in that community -- started with five jobs and people thinking of 
how they could take a raw product and transmit into something that all of 
us can use and do use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about the future of Saskatchewan, 
government plans, the plan that we have for the 1990s and beyond and how we 
got to there.  As you know, Mr. Speaker, over the last nine years, I've 
literally visited just about every RM and every town and village in this 
province.  I've been to dozens of conventions where -- RM convention, SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention, 
administrators convention, SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 
convention -- I've been to lots of conventions, Mr. Speaker, where farmers, 
both from the towns and from the villages and from the farm itself, have 
all been working together as a community group. 
 
In town halls and auditoriums across Saskatchewan and western Canada, I've 
talked of the need to protect and to build this province.  I've talked also 
about the need to diversify and expand our economy.  I've talked about the 
partnership of communities working together to build their part of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I've talked about how our government needs 
to be restructured for the future -- how we need to revamp and how we need 
to restructure our communities for the future.  And at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker, how communities can get involved in doing that themselves, and how 
we maintain the structure out there of communities that me and you have 
known for many, many years. 
 
And while I was visiting these communities to share the plan, our plan for 
the future, I was also there to listen to what communities told us and I 
believe were very good ideas.  Our plan to build and protect this province 
of Saskatchewan, to see us through in the next century with a strong and a 
very vibrant economy. 
 
The overall challenge we face, Mr. Speaker, today is the challenge to lay 
the foundation for that new economy, that new structure.  There is much 
energy devoted to discussion about the new economy and about the world 



 

 

change, but precious few with the courage to create a vision for the future 
and the strength to lead our province through these very difficult times 
into the next century. 
 
This Premier, our Premier and this government, have demonstrated the 
courage and the strength necessary to take important steps in diversifying 
our economy, and in thinking of solutions that will ensure all the people 
of Saskatchewan have the opportunity to grow in these very challenging 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've targeted expenditures in an integrated plan to develop 
and build the categories of infrastructure needed for this province.  
Infrastructure in this province needs . . . if it is to deliver the product 
of diversification efforts, provide opportunities for young people, 
security for seniors, and opportunities for our native people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, roads, I just want to take a moment on roads.  Our road 
networks are critically important to our province.  Forty-five per cent of 
our population live outside of the 12 cities.  Almost half of our 
population live in rural Saskatchewan, and the roads that are needed, not 
only for personal transportation but to maintain a market delivery system. 
 
Just to give you an idea of the roads we have built, that were built in 
1947.  There was 250 kilometres of roads paved then.  Today, today, Mr. 
Speaker, we have 20,000 nearly kilometres of roads paved.  In the rural . . 
. Under RMs we have 57,000 grid road miles out there.  We have almost 
150,000 main farm access or just access roads in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  We have almost 170,000 kilometres of roads in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, more than any other province, and in fact more than . . . 
almost as much as all of Canada in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to also just mention another area that we've been working on, and 
that's municipal capital grant program which provides funding for 
municipalities to build and maintain the municipal infrastructure, ensuring 
the facilities of our towns and municipalities do not deteriorate, in spite 
of the difficult agriculture economy which have reduced many of our 
municipalities' ability to raise the revenues needed to keep things up on 
their own. 
 
These are all new developments, and they're all intricate.  And I just want 
to go through some of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 1 o'clock, the House stands adjourned until Monday 
at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 


