





























































Hansard: May 24, 1991


 

 

May 24/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to rise today on a point of 
order and the point of order follows yesterday's business, and I do know 
that a point of order must be raised immediately after the event 
transpires.  I did not have that opportunity last night because I also know 
that the rules say that you may not raise a point of order on a motion to 
adjourn. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, I rise on the point of order with respect to 
adjournments of this legislature.  I know, Mr. Speaker, that our rule book 
is very straightforward and very simple, and it says that a motion to 
adjourn the House is always in order.  I present the argument to you, 
though, Mr. Speaker, that I do not believe that the intent of that simple 
rule was ever for people to be able to stand up at any time and just 
adjourn the House because they were dissatisfied with what was going on or 
had run out of things to do or to simply abuse the system. 
 
And I refer, Mr. Speaker, to Beauchesne's parliamentary guide, the 6th 
Edition.  And here, Mr. Speaker, is where more detailed rules and 
procedures and practices have been established.  I refer you, Mr. Speaker, 
to page 112 of this edition, item no. 378 that refers to the standing order 
30(4)(b) in the House of Commons that "requires the House to finish with 
Introduction of Government Bills before adjourning." 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the intent of that is that we should finish 
work in the Assembly before we go home for the day.  As one of my 
colleagues mentioned to me this morning, he has some hired men back home, 
and he said that his hired men finish the job before they quit work.  I 
think most Saskatchewan people would agree with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I would also, Mr. Speaker, like to refer to item no. 
379 that says: "The adjournment of the House cannot be moved during 
Question Period."  Here too in past days, this has happened.  I would make 
a third and final argument, Mr. Speaker, that under item no. 384, it says 
that: "There must be some question before the House for a Member to move a 
motion to adjourn the House." 
 
Now as I understand it, there was no motion before the House.  There was 
simply petitions. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the continual adjournments of this House are 
at the height of the abuse of this system.  On a scale of 1 to 10, I would 
put them at a 10 in abusing the privileges of this House.  That is, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, we are here to work.  We are here to do business at the 
legislature's call.  And I believe that calling motions to adjourn the 
House in the way that it has been done are, if not contrary to our rule, 
absolutely contrary to the intent and the spirit of us as elected members 
and the rules that our forefathers set down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to speak to 
the point of order put to the Assembly by the Government House Leader.  Mr. 
Speaker, it's clear to members of the opposition that adjournment motions 
as laid out in our rule book, the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan, is absolutely and unequivocally clear about 
adjournment motions. 
 
One can argue about adjournment motions in other jurisdictions or in other 
forums or in other meetings, but I think one thing that is clear is that 
adjournment motions have been and continue to be, by the rules of this 
Assembly, in order at all times.  And to that end, if the member was to 
look at page 2 of the rules, point 4, under adjournment motions, it clearly 
says: 
 

 A motion to adjourn the Assembly shall always be in order, but no second 
motion to the same effect shall be made until after some intermediate 
proceeding has taken place. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there's reason for that and there's also precedent as to how 
adjournment motions have been moved in this House on a number of occasions, 
not only during this debate but during other historic debates here in the 
Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to the issue of why we are at this 
impasse in terms of adjourning the House, in terms of presenting petitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that in many ways this Assembly has changed over the 
last 10 years, that the world has changed over the last 10 years -- whether 
it's in eastern Europe or whether it's in Canada; whether it's in any 
jurisdiction -- that the idea of majority governments coming to the 
Assembly and jamming through unpopular Bills is coming to an end. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, far from being apologetic for the 
manoeuvres and tactics and the stalling tactics we have on Bill 61, far 
from being apologetic, the people of this province are saying to us -- some 
Reform Party people, many of them Conservative people, a large number NDP 
(New Democratic Party), and Liberals -- are saying that at last they have 
some say during a four year mandate of a majority government.  At last they 
have some say. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, so they should.  That the day of a majority 
government coming to this Assembly and for four years acting in a 
dictatorial way, that whatever they want to do, whether it's privatization 



 

 

of SaskEnergy when they promised not to do it, whether it's the issue of 
this Bill being put to the Assembly, Bill 61 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Without a mandate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Without a mandate, with the vast majority of people 
being opposed to it, that that day is coming to an end and this opposition 
is going to be part of making that change and including people in the 
decision making in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, on the idea of petitions, we have had a 
hundred thousand petitions given to our office to present here.  And this 
is what the point of order is about. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I do want to give the hon. member an 
opportunity to express his views.  At the same time I don't want this 
particular point of order, which is on the adjournment of the House -- and 
I know it ties into other areas; I realize that -- but I don't want it to 
become a wide-ranging debate. 
 
So I'm asking you to speak to the point of order as directly as possible, 
and don't enter into a wide-ranging debate which will take away from the 
actual point of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  And what I'm 
talking to here is the adjournment motion but also the reference that the 
Government House Leader made to the petitions being presented here in the 
Assembly.  And I'm sure that Mr. Speaker wasn't attempting to . . . saying 
about petitions. 
 
But I say that this Assembly has changed in the last 10 years.  Some would 
argue, I would say a minority, that it doesn't function.  The vast majority 
of people that I talk to are saying that the actions of the opposition in 
stopping this unpopular Bill are perfectly within the rules of the 
Assembly.  And they're asking us not to quit carrying on our protest 
against this Bill but are actually signing the petitions that the member 
opposite refers to by the tens of thousands. 
 
That is not an obstruction of the legislative process.  I say it's 
encouraging that we have over a hundred thousand people petitioning the 
members of this Assembly to stop an unpopular tax Bill. 
 
My final point, Mr. Speaker, is this -- is that when I first came to this 
Assembly back in 1978, petitions were virtually unheard of.  The members of 
the population didn't know that they had even the right to present 
petitions.  Now we have people becoming involved on many, many issues 
wanting us to present petitions.  I don't think that's bad for democracy.  
Mr. Speaker, I say this is good for democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was not intending to speak to 
the point of order but I listened with some deep concern to the remarks 
just made by the Opposition House Leader. 
 
And I think we have to put this in perspective, Mr. Speaker, in that we 
should keep in mind a fundamental political issue here.  And that is that 
we do have the statements of the opposition that when this Bill was tabled, 
prior to the tabling of this Bill, that they said they were going to 
filibuster and stop it, that they had no intention at the outset ever to 
debate this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That obviously goes to the very heart and the basis of parliament, Mr. 
Speaker -- parliament being the right to speak.  We have moved, Mr. 
Speaker, from a pride of debate in this Assembly to a pride of delay, and I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that that is contrary to the fundamental basis and 
existence of parliament. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- But the more controversial statement just made, and I say 
damning to a democracy and ending . . . if accepted as the principle, 
ending the British parliamentary form of government, is the statement by 
the hon. member, the Leader of the . . . the Opposition House Leader where 
he says, the days that a majority government can bring in controversial 
legislation will end and are ending for ever, Mr. Speaker.  That is totally 
contrary to the British parliamentary system.  When majority governments 
are elected by whatever percentage they may have, they are still a majority 
government, Mr. Speaker, and that has not changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- What the hon. member is saying is that a majority 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order!  Order.  
I realize this is an emotion that . . . or rather an issue that stirs 
emotions.  It's an important issue before the House.  And because of that I 
would like the hon. members to try to co-operate somewhat more than normal; 
that each side has an opportunity to speak to the point of order.  And I'm 
going to give each side that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On one thing we can agree and 
that is that the House has changed.  Some may say for the worse; others may 
say for the better.  And I would suspect that all hon. members would also 
agree that in today's society, issues are increasingly complex, answers may 
not be simple, solutions may not be simplistic.  And I suggest to the hon. 
member to bring forth a proposal that, in a very complex age and in a 
complex environment, that a majority government can no longer bring forward 
controversial legislation, that it is the right of the opposition to stop a 
majority government from being a majority government, it's the end, Mr. 
Speaker, of the British parliamentary system. 
 
And they have no mandate, no right, no prerogative, and no law or rule 



 

 

giving them that right, Mr. Speaker.  That is what's being taken away.  
That is what is being challenged.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is 
terribly wrong.  As I say, when the right to delay ends the right to 
debate, it is the end, Mr. Speaker, of the British parliamentary system. 
 
That is not a mandate given to the opposition.  It's not a mandate given to 
the government, Mr. Speaker.  It is not a mandate given by the people of 
this province to stop parliament and stop the right to debate, Mr. Speaker.  
It's time to get on with the business of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to respond to this 
point of order briefly.  And I first of all want to respond by commenting 
on the remarks by the Minister of Justice who has once again in his usual 
way taken the debate and twisted the facts and misinterpreted the facts in 
order to try to get some kind of a statement out there which has got 
nothing to do with what the issue is involved and what has been said in the 
past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He talked about the fundamental issue.  I want to talk about the 
fundamental issue which this point of order addresses itself to.  The 
Minister of Justice said that it was said by the opposition that there 
would not be any debate on this Bill.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if that is what 
was said, what is it then that compelled the government to feel that it had 
to use closure to stop the debate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I say to the Minister of Justice, listen carefully to 
what he is saying.  He even in his own words is contradicting what he is 
saying in his attempt to twist what the facts are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He wonders whether we need to change the rules of this House and the whole 
process of government, which this point of order tries to address.  Yes, we 
do.  We most certainly do.  And that is why the New Democratic Party, the 
official opposition, has made available to the government and to the public 
and to this House, a democratic reform paper which would in fact increase 
the amount of involvement and participation in the debate by the public on 
very important and fundamental issues to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And that's what this process is all about.  This 
process is about allowing the public an opportunity to become involved in 
this debate which so dramatically affects and impacts on them. 
 
If the members of the opposition are not able to adjourn the House from 
time to time, as we have done, the public is telling us they will not have 
the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to get their petitions here so that they can 
be presented and so that they can be heard. 
 
That is therefore, Mr. Speaker, a legitimate process so that the public in 



 

 

fact can be heard and therefore their views can be made known before this 
kind of legislation is rammed through the House, which is another part of 
this argument.  If the member opposite gets away with his point of order, 
this legislation the government will ram through the House without the 
public having an opportunity to be part of the debate, and that would be 
wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I'd like to speak to 
this point of order, Mr. Speaker.  Three years ago . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I'd like to introduce some 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: -- The member has asked for leave to introduce guests.  Is 
leave granted?  And once more, as on previous occasions, may I ask leave 
for the benefit of all members who may wish to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  These students are on a 
schedule and I feel honoured in introducing them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure this morning . . . it's rather a unique 
experience because I have the pleasure on behalf of myself and the hon. 
member from Pelly to introduce three schools from the Yorkdale School 
Division.  These schools are from Ebenezer, Dunleath, and Rhein.  They are 
46 grade 4, 5, and 6 students.  They are accompanied today by Mrs. Jackie 
Adam, Mr. Martin Philips, and Mr. Ed Machushek, all teachers in these 
schools. 
 
They are in Regina for the day, and I invite them to join me for a photo 
session at 10:30 as well as refreshments in our caucus room following that.  
So I'd like all members of this legislature to welcome students from 
Yorkdale School Division. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- It is my privilege today to introduce to you and to all 
members of the House, 11 adult students from the SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw 
who are visiting the House today, Mr. Speaker.  They're seated in your 
gallery. 
 
They are accompanied by their instructor Linda Paice -- Lidia Paice.  
Sorry, Lidia -- and I'm thankful that they're here today to witness this 
important debate that's happening in the House this morning. 
 



 

 

I look forward to meeting with the students from SIAST later today, about 
11:00, and I hope they enjoy their time here at the Legislative Assembly.  
I ask all members to welcome them please. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great pleasure today to 
introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly here today, 37 grade 7 to 
9 students from the school of Frontier, which is my . . . I am their 
neighbour. 
 
Accompanying them today are teachers Murray Legge -- I'm not sure if I'm 
pronouncing that right, Murray -- Mike Puszkar and Ruth Armstrong.  The 
chairpersons today that are here helping look after them is Aggie Howell, 
Rose Ham, Loretta Vasseur, Jackie Popick.  And the most important ones, I 
guess, are the people that brought him here, are the bus drivers, Danny 
Lavik and Norm Baker. 
 
I just hope you enjoy the proceedings here today and see what's going on 
and I will be meeting with you for pictures and drinks at 10:30 and we can 
talk about what is happening here and ask questions.  So I would like 
everybody here in the Assembly today to help me welcome the students from 
Frontier here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure this morning through you to introduce to all members of the 
Assembly, some distinguished guests from South Africa and their 
Saskatchewan friends who are accompanying them.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
draw your attention to three guests in the gallery facing me.  I wonder if 
they would rise, please.  I would like to introduce Mlungisi Hlongwane, 
Steven Sondiyazi, and Bafo Nyanga, all from South Africa.  And they are 
accompanied by Barb Byers, the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour, and Bill Robb who is one of two workers on the Saskatchewan 
international labour project, who I'd also like to have stand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these guests are indeed distinguished guests.  Both Mlungisi 
and Steven are members of a South African union delegation and Bafo is the 
South African Congress of Trade Union's Canadian representative here in 
Canada, and they are going to be visiting in Saskatchewan for the next few 
days.  Their itinerary includes work at labour conventions, participation 
in labour schools, work-place tours, meetings with labour locals, and 
public meetings in all of the western provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to say a word about our two guests who are visiting from South 
Africa because they have both played a leading role in the struggle against 
apartheid in that country, Mr. Speaker, and I want to have that role 
recognized. 
 
Mlungisi is the general secretary of the Post & Telecommunications Workers 
Association.  He lives in Soweto and he's been involved in the formation of 
street committees and is an active member of the African National Congress.  



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that he was detained for six months under 
the Internal Security Act in South Africa as he suffered from apartheid. 
 
And likewise, Steven has played a major role in the trade union movement in 
South Africa, being regional chairperson in the Orange Free State for the 
Food & Allied Workers Union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Assembly would join me in giving a special 
welcome to these guests from South Africa and their Saskatchewan 
counterparts. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was beginning to say, three years ago 
when I was elected, to my knowledge, for the first time in history a leader 
of an opposition appointed someone as a critic for democratic reform.  Now 
the Leader of the Opposition recognized that this legislature had changed 
over the years and that there were a number of changes required to make it 
function more effectively in a more accountable way and to look for ways to 
ensure greater public access of the Assembly and greater participation and 
openness by citizens of the province. 
 
Now that was a serious attempt to try in a responsible way bring forth 
recommendations to achieve those principles, Mr. Speaker.  We took that 
review very seriously.  As you know, sir, we have released two reports 
related to a number of democratic reform initiatives and in fact have gone 
further.  This is . . . I'm coming to the point, Mr. Speaker . . . have 
gone further in that we have . . . 
 
The House Leader and the Minister of Justice talks about democracy, Mr. 
Speaker.  We have a private members' Bill which calls for by-elections 
within six months of the vacancy because 45,000 residents of this province 
have no representation in this Assembly.  That's how concerned they are 
about democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the House Leader said earlier that these . . . the way we're occupying 
the House here are merely petitions.  Mr. Speaker, in the last four and a 
half years, on three occasions, there have been over a hundred thousand 
petition names tabled in this legislature which says something to me, Mr. 
Speaker, about the way this government does business and views the public 
of Saskatchewan, because they have not . . . they've backed off on one of 
those only. 
 
Now here they are at four years and seven months into their mandate, when 
the moral, ethical mandate is four months in this province and in the 
British parliamentary system.  Only two times in our 19 elections have we 
gone over four years, Mr. Speaker; that's the history of this province -- 
twice by this PC (Progressive Conservative) government.  Well that's 
undemocratic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this major tax grab that they wanted to . . . they indicated they were 



 

 

going to bring in closure on after only two of their members had spoken, 
only three of our members had spoken.  That is not correct.  I resent the 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that I represent 21,000 voters, was not going to get an 
opportunity on behalf of those voters to speak to this largest tax grab in 
the history of the province.  That is undemocratic, Mr. Speaker.  That is 
undemocratic. 
 
The Minister of Justice who got up so sanctimoniously a few minutes ago -- 
he's the person that I heard on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
radio that the legislature doesn't work, that's why we didn't call the 
members back for nine and a half months.  That is undemocratic, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that to say that the petition names -- that the 
residents of Saskatchewan are asking this government to withdraw this Bill, 
to reverse its decision, that they have no mandate to collect this tax at 
this point in time -- to say to the people of Saskatchewan that those are 
merely names, that they're not important in this Legislative Assembly, is 
an affront to democracy, and that government should be embarrassed . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, first question to 
be asked is what is happening here.  What is happening in the legislature 
of Saskatchewan that is unusual from what has happened in democratic 
legislatures throughout the world? 
 
And I would say the first thing that is happening -- and I will outline my 
arguments in more detail as to what is happening -- but what is happening 
is that the NDP in effect are doing what they have no mandate to do, and 
that is to effectively abolish this legislature as a functioning 
institution in the province of Saskatchewan.  This government has a 
five-year mandate to govern, and the members of the opposition are trying 
to abolish that mandate before there is an election. 
 
Now there will be an election within about six months in this province, and 
the people will have their ultimate rights and democracy to choose a 
government.  The question, when that happens, Mr. Speaker, is if the rules 
of this legislature are not such that they can have a functioning 
legislature, will the people of Saskatchewan actually have the right to 
elect a functioning government?  That choice will be in the hands of the 
people. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.  We could go on this way 
and interrupt the hon. member, but we won't really be speaking to the point 
of order and paying close attention, considering the points of view of all 
members.  Therefore I ask the hon. members to co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, when the people exercise their democratic 
right to vote within five years, the maximum being five years, they are 
entitled to believe . . . and have the right to elect a legislature that 
can function and will function according to the democratic rules that have 
been developed over a period of years. 



 

 

 
Let me say that nine years ago when I was elected to this Assembly, I came 
in here as a lawyer, a courtroom lawyer, who had many years experience in 
court, and it was very familiar for me to step into this legislature.  
People ask me: what is it like being a member of the legislature?  I said 
it is similar to court.  There is a man, the chairman like the judge, but 
we call him the Speaker, and he has robes just like a judge.  And it is his 
duty to preside over the legislature.  That is your role, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I said the only difference I had noticed, and that was nine years ago, is 
that the similarities end because in court there are rules but I couldn't 
detect that there were rules in the legislature.  In any event, none that 
were effectively followed and applied so that the institution could 
function in a democratic way. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there's a similarity between courts and this 
legislature.  They are part of our system of government.  The legislature 
is part of the system; the Executive Council is part of the system; the 
courts are part of the system -- the three elements of our government. 
 
The courts, Mr. Speaker, have rules which allow them to function.  They are 
called the rules of court.  The first thing that you should note, Mr. 
Speaker, is that in the courts, the rules of court are drawn up by the 
judges.  In effect, the similarity here is that in the legislature the 
rules would be drawn up by the Speaker and that is the case, Mr. Speaker.  
Over at least 800 years, Speakers have made rulings.  Speakers make rulings 
so that the legislature can continue to function.  There are times when the 
legislators will write those rulings down into rules of procedure. 
 
However, as in the courts, the rules cannot cover every eventuality.  And 
in the courts, the judges make rulings on procedure.  For over 1500 years, 
judges have done that so that the courts could continue to function.  And 
the rules were changed from time to time to meet the practicality of the 
rulings that the judges have made over hundreds of years.  The same has 
applied in the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  And I submit that you have a duty 
like a judge in a court to ensure that the rules are interpreted so that 
the court, or in this case the legislature, can function in a manner that 
was intended by our constitution and by our ancestors when they developed 
the principles of democracy. 
 
What point are we at here, Mr. Speaker?  I started this argument and I said 
that the NDP are effectively trying to abolish the legislature by 
obstruction.  We have the member opposite state an unbelievable statement, 
and he says: there is an end coming to the day when governments can bring 
in controversial legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the courts deal with controversial cases every day.  And I can 
assure you that lawyers are as obstructionist as any opposition ever has 
been.  And I can assure you that lawyers dilly-dally, try to delay, seek 
adjournment, but there comes a time when a judge in a court or a Speaker in 
a legislature has to make a ruling so that the court . . . or so that the 
legislature can continue to function. 
 



 

 

I submit in conclusion, Mr. Speaker: it is the role of Speakers everywhere 
to make rulings so that their Assembly can continue to function.  In this 
case, a point of order has been raised asking you, Mr. Speaker, to make a 
ruling so that this Assembly can continue to function.  That is what we are 
asking today.  It is something that has been asked of Speakers and judges 
for up to 2,000 years.  Judges are appointed judges to make decisions based 
on judgement, not based on rules chiselled in stone or written on papyrus 
or written on paper made in Saskatchewan at Weyerhaeuser.  Judges are to 
judge and use their judgement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit the role of the Speaker is the same -- that when all 
else fails, the Speaker is the person in charge.  It is the duty of the 
Speaker to take charge and to ensure that the Assembly the Speaker is in 
charge of can function, and that is the point of order we are raising, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to speak to this 
point of order, and I want to put in it context, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake wishes to 
bring something forward. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'd ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this morning 
to introduce members of the newly formed Independent Auto Dealers and 
Suppliers Coalition to stop the PST (provincial sales tax).  These guests, 
Mr. Speaker, are sitting in the east gallery.  They are representative of 
business men and women throughout this province who are dealing with used 
automobiles, sir. 
 
I would like to recognize them.  There are people from Regina.  We have 
people from other areas of this province who are concerned as well.  And 
they are here today to make their views with respect to the provincial 
goods and services tax known and to ask this government to reconsider their 
decision to ram this Bill through the legislature. 
 
I ask all guests . . . or all members to welcome these guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to speak to this point of order.  And what I 
want to say first is that I want to question the motives of the government 
in moving the point of order.  I want to ask the question . . . I'm asking 



 

 

the question myself, Mr. Speaker: what are the motives?  Are the motives to 
ensure the functioning of the Assembly and respect for democracy or are the 
. . . I believe they are not, Mr. Speaker.  I believe the motives are one 
very simple thing.  The motives are that the government wants to end debate 
on the PST Bill and put the Bill behind them, Mr. Speaker, because everyone 
knows now that more than 80 per cent of the Saskatchewan public oppose this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what this government is doing is using another procedural antic to 
bring debate on the Bill to a close.  I believe that's the motive behind 
the point of order, Mr. Speaker.  If I believed the motive was one of 
concern for democracy, I would feel very differently about the point of 
order. 
 
But I want to say why I don't believe why the motive is one of concern for 
democracy.  Mr. Speaker, the reason I don't believe the motive is one of 
concern for democracy is that there has been nothing democratic from the 
very beginning about the way the government has handled the introduction of 
the expanded PST in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we had the government bring the tax into effect 
without ever referring anything to this legislature.  The tax was brought 
into effect by press release without a budget even being presented in this 
Assembly.  Now if that is not a violation of democratic rights, Mr. 
Speaker, of the people of the province, I don't know what is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Then, Mr. Speaker, almost a month after the government 
brought the tax into effect and people were already paying it, the 
government finally got up the nerve to introduce a Bill to retroactively 
authorize the tax into this Assembly.  And what did they do, Mr. Speaker?  
They allowed no more than five of our members to speak to the tax Bill and 
then they introduced a closure motion, Mr. Speaker, limiting the rest of 
the debate to five hours and in effect guaranteeing that the vast majority 
of members of this Assembly could never speak to the tax Bill.  And if that 
isn't a violation of democracy, I don't know what is, sir.  And so I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that that gets at the motives behind the current point of 
order by the Government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice says that members on this side of the 
house don't want to debate the Bill.  That is not true, sir.  Members on 
this side of the House do want to debate the Bill.  We are being denied our 
right to debate the Bill.  And in the face of being denied that right, we 
are using the last democratic mechanism that we have, Mr. Speaker, to stop 
the Bill, and that is the presentation of petitions.  That is our only 
vehicle for bringing public opinion and public opposition against this tax 
to bear on this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The presentation of petitions, Mr. Speaker, is the only mechanism we have 
left to bring public opinion to bear, to let this government know that this 
tax is unfair and unjustified.  That's what we've been attempting to do.  
And what we are expressing our concern about with respect to this point of 



 

 

order, Mr. Speaker, is that we are saying that the government should not be 
allowed to ram this tax Bill through without consultation with the public 
and without debate, Mr. Speaker.  That's what we are saying.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, this government is attempting to do that time and time again.  And 
we are going to do everything we can to prevent them from ramming this Bill 
through without consultation and without debate in this Assembly.  Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I am going to recognize the Minister of Labour and 
Employment.  Then I will recognize one or two others.  And then I think it 
will be time for us to draw the points of view on the point of order to a 
conclusion. 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to speak to the 
point of order because in my home town, my city of Regina, there's been 
much discussion by my constituents and the people in Regina as well as 
throughout the rest of the province concerning the  
 Dimpasse that this legislature is in. 
 
And clearly, whether it's Bill 61 or the Appropriation Bill or whatever, 
Mr. Speaker, is a part of our role as a duly elected government.  It's part 
of the budget.  And clearly there are two opinions that we have here -- the 
government's and the opposition.  And clearly the legislature is set up to 
debate those two positions. 
 
Now they say about jamming or ramming unpopular Bills; they say about 
motives and all the rest of it.  Mr. Speaker, they miss one important 
thing.  The radical bunch over there miss one important thing about 
democracy.  It is up to the people to judge, not for them to judge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- The election will be called by our Premier who indeed 
has the responsibility to call that election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Fully, Mr. Speaker, the opposition, and they don't want 
to hear this -- the election will be called in due course.  They know that.  
And it's not up to them to call it.  It's not up to them to call it.  The 
mandate is clear.  It's five years.  It's up to the Premier to call it.  It 
will be called.  And we are prepared, Mr. Speaker, to have the people judge 
us, not them. 
 
Having said that, what the people are looking for, Mr. Speaker, is a good . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm just delighted that they 
say election and debate.  They have to understand something.  There is not 
a closure motion before the House, Mr. Speaker; there's a time allocation 
motion, and there's a significant difference. 
 
We have sat in this Assembly.  The Leader of the Opposition, who is a 
skilled orator and has no problem with a debate, will get up and debate.  
But the people of this province, my constituents, don't expect those 
members to get up and talk for four or five hours on the Alamo or on Greek 
history or on any other thing that they want to talk about.  They want to 
talk about the Bill. 
 
We have now offered the opposition, Mr. Speaker, five days, which is the 
equivalent of one hour each in good, honest debate -- one hour.  Now if 
they can't make their point in one hour, then they don't possess the skills 
that they should have to stand in this legislature and debate that Bill, 
and allow the people to judge on how the debate goes.  Either they are 
right or we are right, and the winner will prevail. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is our right and our responsibility and our duty to 
operate this government in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Hold it, hold it, excuse me.  Now as I have mentioned 
earlier, it isn't fair when an hon. member is on his feet speaking with the 
views that he holds dear, to, as it were, shout him down.  It doesn't 
matter who the member is, on which side of the House. 
 
So I'm asking the hon. members to allow the Minister of Labour and 
Employment to conclude his remarks and the next member will be given the 
same opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Now there's been a lot of remarks made from the other 
side of the floor from the members in their seats.  But if they are 
prepared to debate this Bill and if they are prepared to take the five days 
that was offered by our government and speak for an hour each over there in 
their turn, that offer will be there, and let's have some good, honest 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm going to take a couple more.  Order.  I'll take 
a couple of more.  I'll take the member from The Battlefords and one more, 
and then I believe we'll have to move on from there. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to 
enter into the debate on this point of order. 
 
The hole in the member's argument who just spoke is, if he wants the people 
to decide, why hasn't his government, Mr. Speaker, called by-elections for 
18 months in some of the seats that are vacant? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, it goes back to the days of the Magna Carta -- 
that you don't have taxation without representation.  They've allowed four 
seats vacant in this province, some as long as 18 months, without any 
representation.  And they want to impose new taxes by press release on the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan.  I say yes, let the people decide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the real crux of the problem here is that we have a government 
that any time they don't like something that somebody else says they try 
and banish them and keep them quiet. 
 
Even going back to the great philosopher Voltaire, the French philosopher, 
the leading light in the age of enlightenment in the 18th century, he said, 
on the principles of democracy: I may disagree profusely with what you say 
but I will defend to the death your right to say it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- But this government, Mr. Speaker, doesn't want anybody who 
will say anything against them to be heard anywhere in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  They try and spread fear and intimidation instead of letting 
democracy work. 
 
One of the greatest functions of this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, outside of 
setting laws and changing laws, is the budgetary process and beyond that is 
the preservation of democracy.  Because without the people's voices being 
allowed to be heard in this Assembly, there virtually is no democracy 
except on election day, Mr. Speaker.  And that's what we've come to now.  
We've seen this government put other people into uncomfortable positions. 
 
I think that we have to look, Mr. Speaker, very closely at what they are 
doing in this Legislative Assembly.  What they are doing is that they are 
forcing you, sir, as the rule setter of this place, to make unpopular 
decisions instead of them making the hard decisions themselves to allow 
debate and to allow the people of Saskatchewan to decide over this 
government, who has gone long too far into a mandate that they can only 
superficially hold up, because there is no traditional mandate that goes to 
the end of five years unless there's war in the country or insurrection or 
some serious problem. 
 
If you look at the average length of time of elections in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, before this government came into place in 1982, 
it was almost to the day.  Four years was the traditional historical 
average of elections.  This government has totally ignored that. 
 
They have no mandate and the people in Saskatchewan feel they have no 
mandate to bring in a tax like this.  They brought it in by press release.  
They don't want it debated in the Legislative Assembly and I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, people have the historic right and the ancient right to petition 
this Assembly to get this government to come to their senses.  They have no 
mandate to impose this tax.  They have no mandate to bring in closure on 
such a debate. 



 

 

 
And I say yes -- as the member from Regina South said -- let the people 
decide.  Let this debate continue or else go to the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan.  Let them decide, sir.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Hon. members indicate they wish to speak on it.  I 
certainly don't want to cut off anybody from expressing their views.  So 
I'll, you know, carry on after the hon. member for Rosthern, the Minister 
of Social Services, expresses his views. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much for protecting my rights to speak 
in this House, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that's the fundamental gist of 
what this motion is all about.  And I would like to bring some 
reasonableness back into the arguments that have been put forth. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that points of order are raised 
based on rules.  And what I have been hearing and listening to from members 
opposite is a lot of rhetoric and very little substance.  And I would 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that we get back to the fundamental of what 
this issue is all about, the fundamentals, as my House Leader so succinctly 
put at the beginning of this debate when he used citations out of 
Beauchesne's, which of course is the recognized authority when it comes to 
parliamentary rules and procedures.  And he used citation, and I would just 
like to reiterate for you, Mr. Speaker, from Beauchesne's, page 112, 
citation 377, 378, 379, and 384 numbers (1) to (4), to substantiate the 
arguments that he was forthcoming with. 
 
Now I would like to respond to the heckling across the floor by the 
Opposition House Leader when he says, what about my point.  The point that 
he raised very selectively was from the Saskatchewan Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly.  And that is the substantial argument that he 
has and that is the end of the argument that he had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that the function of this legislature is for 
members to work, for members to be heard, for members to be allowed to 
speak.  That fundamental right has been denied over the last number of days 
by the members opposite.  They have entered this legislature with the 
avowed purpose of making this Legislative Assembly unworkable.  That was 
their avowed purpose. 
 
And I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that they have done an excellent job in 
that because they have ground the wheels to a halt in the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is a shame. It is a 
shame that they are unwilling to put their points forth in argument, to put 
their points forth in debate.  They've had the opportunity.  Twenty 
members, if you check Hansard, Mr. Speaker, have already had the 
opportunity to ask questions or make points about Bill 61 -- 20 members 
opposite.  I'm not talking about our members; I'm talking about their 
members, through the various legitimate forms that this Legislative 
Assembly offers to them.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, it augurs very, very 
ill for this Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly when they will hide from 



 

 

debate. 
 
Yesterday we had a typical example of the right for them to, on behalf of 
the citizens of the province, to give forth with petitions.  And we support 
that.  Citizens of Saskatchewan should have the right to petition the 
government.  That's a fundamental right that shall not be denied. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if you check in the history of 
this province you will notice that there have been massive numbers -- and I 
admit that -- there have been massive numbers of petitions submitted; 
40,000, 50,000 names were submitted.  How long did that take, Mr. Speaker? 
-- 10 minutes, 15 minutes, and it was done in a very forthright, upright 
parliamentary traditional procedure. 
 
Now we have had very limited number of petitions being presented in how 
many days, tying up the House in a number of days.  Yesterday, when the 
only procedure that the opposition could use to forestall the proceedings 
of this House was in the format of petitions -- and at 10 minutes after 
seven, yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we had two hours and 50 minutes left in the 
House -- they ran out of petitions.  They had no more to present and so 
they moved adjournment of this House.  I think that is pathetic.  I think 
that is pathetic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental issue that we have to get back to in this 
point of order is that the opposition is saying we, as a duly elected 
majority government, do not have the right to bring forth controversial 
legislation.  Mr. Speaker, that is something we cannot buy.  We are a duly 
elected, majority government that is saying we believe this particular 
thing has to go.  Let's debate it.  Let's discuss it.  And I challenge the 
opposition: they can also bring forth alternatives during this period of 
time.  We have heard nothing.  We have had no opportunity to debate. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the fundamental issue that we have to get back to, 
and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in your role as presiding officer, I think 
-- I know -- that you will do what is right in getting this House back into 
a functioning, reasonable Legislative Assembly where we can get on with the 
people's business.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate that 
and I recognize that you're anxious to proceed, and I won't take any more 
time than I have to. 
 
I do however want to respond to some of the comments that have been made, 
perhaps in reverse order.  The member from Rosthern referred to petitions 
being presented.  That's true.  A hundred thousand petitions were presented 
on the health care cuts in 1987 within a couple of hours.  What happened?  
You ignored them.  You just blissfully ignored them as if public opinion 
didn't count. 
 
I say to members opposite, and to Mr. Speaker, the day of governing in such 
an autocratic fashion is coming to an end.  The public have said they're 



 

 

not going to tolerate it. 
 
I won't repeat the arguments so eloquently put by my seat mate and by the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview with respect to the changing nature of 
public expectations of the legislature.  The gravamen of the complaint by 
the member from Melfort is that the opposition is obstructing. 
 
The position we take, and is being shared by an increasing of parties, is 
if that's the only means the public have of bringing their views to bear on 
the issues of the day, then the public are prepared to accept that.  What 
the public are not prepared to accept is a government which gets elected 
and then flouts public opinion for four years, for five in this case.  The 
public in Canada, and in Saskatchewan in particular, are saying that style 
of government must go. 
 
And thus in Ontario you have the reverse.  The actors are changed, but the 
opposition Conservatives and, to a lesser, Liberals are obstructing the NDP 
government with the full consent and support of the Ontario electorate.  
The style of government which members opposite are engaging in is gone.  
The member from The Battlefords quoted Voltaire . . . 
 
(1100) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member for . . . Order.  The member from 
Moose Jaw North and the Minister of Social Services are interrupting the 
debate, and I'd ask them to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The member from The Battlefords quoted Voltaire.  I 
want to quote a more recent authority, a Canadian, a Conservative 
appointment to the Senate, a confidant of Liberal prime ministers, and one 
who worked closely with the League for Social Reconstruction in the '30s, 
generally regarded as the predecessor of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation). This is a man who has touched all bases and then respected by 
all parties -- Eugene Forsey. 
 
Eugene Forsey wrote a short but interesting book on the pipe line debate -- 
Constitutional Aspects of the Canadian Pipe Line Debate.  He said with 
respect to obstructionism, and this is on page 2 actually of this document: 
 

 Secondly, the Opposition has threatened obstruction.  So it had . . . a 
perfect right to threaten it, and a perfect right to engage in it. 

 
 There was a widespread impression in Canada that obstruction is something 

new and vicious.  It is neither.  It is certainly not new.  The Liberals 
used it in 1881 on the C.P.R. (Canadian Pacific Railway) charter, and 
again in 1896 on the Remedial Bill, and again in 1913 on the Naval Bill.  
The Conservatives used it in 1911 on the Reciprocity Agreement, and (of 
course) again in 1955 (by the late John Diefenbaker on the pipe line 
debate) . . . 

 
He went on to say -- and I'll end with this quotation, end this part of my 
comments with this quotation: 
 



 

 

 Used, as it should be, and (as it) almost always has been in Canada, only 
for the gravest reasons, it is a legitimate and indeed essential part of 
the parliamentary system; in the last resort, with the Government's power 
of dissolution, (it is) the only way of keeping Parliament responsible to 
the people. 

 
It just cannot be said better than that.  It cannot be said better than 
Eugene Forsey said it. 
 
I want to respond before I take my seat to the comments of the member from 
Melville, with respect.  He commented about a court.  It is true that both 
our institutions of government . . . (inaudible) . . . but the similarity 
ends just about there. 
 
A court is an institution to bring abstract rules to bear on tangible 
subjects, on people.  The legislature is an institution whose function is 
designed to bring public opinion to bear on government issues of the day.  
They have totally different functions and different methods of operating. 
 
I want to say as well with . . . members opposite, more than one member 
opposite has stood and complained about us interfering with their right to 
speak.  Now in the 16 years I've been here, I have heard some convoluted 
arguments but that really does walk away with the cake. 
 
I say to members opposite this whole problem began because of the premature 
use of closure.  You brought in closure after only four or five opposition 
speakers had spoken and that's why we're in the muddle we're in.  That's 
why we're in the muddle we're in. 
 
And if you want to speak on this Bill, the solution lies with the 
Government House Leader.  He can withdraw the time allocation.  The 
solution lies with him. 
 
If you want to debate something else, the solution lies with the Government 
House Leader.  He can go on to something else.  The solution is in your own 
hands. 
 
Finally, I want to say with respect to the member from Melville, to the 
member from Rosthern, and particularly the member from Melfort, you created 
the problem.  In the dying days of your government, without a proper 
mandate and with absolutely no moral authority whatsoever, you sought to 
ram through this legislature, a Bill which is monstrously unpopular.  You 
created the problem.  And it is improper of you to ask the Speaker to get 
you out of it.  Because that's what you're asking the Speaker to do.  I 
think that's improper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I think it is improper to ask the Speaker to bail you 
out.  The institution of Speaker is too important to be sacrificed by a 
government which got itself into a problem.  You get in; you get out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- I've listened to arguments on both sides, arguments well 
put and arguments felt sincerely by members.  Having done that, the 
arguments I have heard today on the point of order, I've heard this morning 
raised, are part of the issue that the House is facing.  Therefore, I will 
reserve my ruling on this particular issue.  And we will carry on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I very much accept your ruling.  I would 
think some time to consider that would certainly be satisfactory to all 
members.  I must say, Mr. Speaker, in light of . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- I do need to know why the member is on his feet.  We don't 
have provisions for . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I am on my feet to make a motion just as 
the members last night made a motion in the middle of petitions; they made 
a motion to adjourn the House.  I stand here today in like proceedings, in 
a like manner, and I now make a motion: 
 

 That this House move to question period. 
 

Same principle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- The motion that the hon. member raises is again the type of 
motion that I am considering, the type that I am considering, that is being 
considered.  And because of that I'm not prepared to accept the motion at 
this time.  That is the issue that we're . . . That is one of the issues, I 
should say, not the issue, but one of the issues, one of the points of 
order that are under advisement. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to raise my 
point of order, referring to rule 44 of our handbook, where I'll read into 
the record: 
 

 When the Speaker is of the opinion that a motion offered to the Assembly 
is contrary to the Rules and Privileges of the Legislature, he shall 
apprise the Assembly thereof immediately, before putting the question 
thereon, and quote the authority applicable to the case. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is a motion before this Assembly that you are dealing 
with, and I want to draw your attention to that particular rule, sir, 
because I do feel as a private member of this Assembly that what is going 
on is contrary to my privileges of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I say with respect to the points from the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloyd, if one takes a narrow literal interpretation of this 
section, then the Speaker's role is absolutely impossible to discharge.  
There are some things which a Speaker can rule upon quickly.  They are 
simple and straightforward.  But throughout in any House in the British 
Commonwealth -- and there's hundreds of them -- Speakers take an 
opportunity to consider more complex matters, and if they don't have that 
opportunity it's going to descend into chaos. 
 



 

 

You simply cannot . . . if you were to accept such a narrow, literal 
interpretation of that section, then you make the job of the Speaker 
impossible.  Many of the issues which come before a Speaker are too complex 
and, I add not coincidentally, far too important to make a quick 
off-the-hip decision. 
 
The Speaker in Ontario, faced with somewhat the same issue we have here, 
has given himself two weeks to consider the matter -- said a couple of 
weeks ago that he's going to give his decision on May 27 -- a perfectly 
rational approach to a complex problem. 
 
This is not simple; this is complex.  Complex problems deserve careful 
consideration.  And if you take a literal, narrow interpretation of that 
section, you make your own job impossible. 
 
The Speaker: -- I have listened to the hon. member's point of order and I 
will take it under advisement. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 
allowing me my right to continue presenting petitions on behalf of 
residents. 
 
The Speaker: -- If you don't mind, I don't think that I've officially had 
an opportunity to read "presenting petitions", just to make sure that 
everything is accurate.  Now we have been having points of order raised, 
etc., and I haven't actually called "presenting petitions".  I will do so 
now. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm proud today to rise 
to present petitions, a number of petitions on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan pursuant to rule 11, who are concerned that the government is 
implementing the goods and services tax, or proposing to, and who feel, Mr. 
Speaker, that the government has no mandate to bring in this tax at this 
time.  And the petitioners urge the government of Saskatchewan to  
 Dreverse its decision on this Bill. 
 
It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in fact it is my duty, to present a 
petition on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon Eastview.  And this 
petition indicates what I have just referred to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recognize some of these names.  These are senior citizens.  
These are young people.  These are neighbours.  And they are asking that I 
present this petition on their behalf with the concerns as I had expressed 
them.  So I do that with pleasure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here which again speaks to the same 
three points which I will not repeat.  But these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, 
are also urging the government to reverse its decision on this particular 
tax.  Mr. Speaker, these people are from places like Waseca, Allan, Leask, 
and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  And I wish to present this petition on behalf 
of these 20 residents of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here that is somewhat unique as well, 



 

 

in that it again is signed by residents of Saskatoon Eastview.  There are 
many, many seniors in Saskatoon Eastview, in fact a very high percentage of 
my constituents are seniors because of all the seniors' complexes there.  
And many, many seniors have signed this petition. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by a number of residents who 
specifically live in the Scott and Forget Towers in Saskatoon Eastview.  
Again these are residents who are feeling that they cannot absorb this tax 
and I'm pleased to present it on their behalf -- group of seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here which looks something like an 
atlas as well in terms of going around the province.  This is a petition 
that initiated from the community of Shellbrook, in northern Saskatchewan, 
again with the same prayer urging that this tax not be allowed to proceed, 
and  reversed.  Residents here are from Shellbrook, Canwood, Christopher 
Lake, Paddockwood, Emma Lake, and Spruce Home. 
 
That's seven communities represented on this petition, Mr. Speaker, from 
rural Saskatchewan again, who wish to ask the government to take note of 
their concerns, and I'm proud to present this petition on their behalf as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education says that's a joke for me to be up 
here presenting these petitions, and I take exception to that.  I think 
that's not how the people that I presented petitions on behalf of have felt 
about me presenting petitions on their behalf.  I don't think they view 
that as a joke, and I think that's an affront to the people who have signed 
these petitions, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Education would say that 
presenting petitions is a joke.  I think that's an offence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here that I am very pleased to present 
on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens.  Mr. Speaker, this is a petition that 
comes . . . these petitioners come from the communities of Windthorst, down 
in the south-east corner of the province which I'm very familiar with, also 
come from Viscount, from Allan, North Battleford again, from a variety of 
Saskatchewan residents who are saying that they are concerned about this 
petition and want us to present these on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here that's all from one community.  
The names of these people are from Spruce Home, Saskatchewan.  And these 
are about 12 or 13 petitioners.  Spruce Home is not a big place, but the 
views of the Spruce Home residents is very important.  They are asking that 
the government reverse its decision on this tax, and I'm pleased to present 
this on behalf of those people in their communities.  I present this 
petition at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that again is from a specific 
community.  Mr. Speaker, this petition, again with the same intent and 
message of the other petitions that I presented, this petition is from the 
community of Choiceland, and also Smeaton -- there's one person from 
Smeaton -- but the residents of Choiceland, some 20 residents here are 



 

 

making it clear that they do not support this tax and they are urging their 
government, who they feel has no mandate, to reverse the decision on this 
important tax.  So I'm pleased to present this petition on behalf of 
residents of Choiceland and Smeaton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here from the constituency of 
Saskatoon Eastview.  Again as I would . . . I would suggest that I have an 
obligation on their behalf to present these petition names.  They too 
oppose this 7 per cent provincial sales tax and urge their government to 
reverse its decision because they have no mandate to bring in this tax, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again I recognize a number of these names and I know that they would not 
have signed this petition lightly, Mr. Speaker.  I also recognize some 
business people on there, a senior citizen, and I know that these people 
are from all political persuasions.  This is not a partisan issue.  And I'm 
pleased to present the petition on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I have another petition here that I believe is important 
because all of the petitioners here again are from one community, a 
community in rural Saskatchewan, the community of Holbein.  And these are 
people who are again expressing their concerns about this petition, or 
about this government's actions in this regard. 
 
And these are 20 names that are part of the many, many thousands who have 
very consciously and very deliberately put their signature to participate 
in the democratic process of signalling their views and their opinions to 
their government.  And I am honoured, Mr. Speaker, to present these 
petition names on behalf of the residents of Holbein, Saskatchewan.  There 
are 20 names there from Holbein. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another important petition from Saskatoon and this 
petition is from . . . there are some residents in my constituency.  
There's a resident from the senior Scott-Forget complex.  There's a 
resident from another seniors' complex, the Cosmopolitan Courts complex in 
Saskatoon.  There are people here, some from a variety of constituencies 
because St. Albert's, Adams Crescent.  They're not in Eastview but that 
doesn't matter.  These are residents from across the city of Saskatoon.  
Again I recognize two or three names and I know that these people would 
have very consciously thought about their decision to put their names to 
this petition, and it is my pleasure to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
I just have two or three more, Mr. Speaker, and then I will sit down.  But 
the next petition I have again is from a variety of people across 
Saskatchewan.  I know that this petition was located in one of the business 
establishments in Saskatoon Eastview because it has my name on the bottom 
to return to me.  And most of the petitions are . . . some, by the way, 
some 7,400 petitioners from Saskatoon Eastview so far, Mr. Speaker.  And 
that is about 33 per cent of all the voters in my constituency who have 
signed names to this petition.  But this petition was . . . this form was 
housed in one of the businesses in my riding. 
 



 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are Saskatchewan citizens who have signed this 
petition, not only from Saskatoon, but from Colonsay, from Wadena, from 
Lanigan, from Viscount, from Warman, from Birch Hills, Saskatchewan, and 
from Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker.  So on this name of 20 petitions there are 
eight communities represented all urging the government the same thing, 
that is, to listen to their views with regard to this particular proposed 
goods and services tax and to reverse its decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition and I think it's important to present 
this one because it again is urging the province to stop the provincial GST 
(goods and services tax).  But these petitioners are from the community of 
Drake, and I'm not aware that there have been other petition names from the 
town of Drake -- again not a large town but an important town and important 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan.  And I'm very pleased to present 
on behalf of the citizens of Drake -- and I might add there's a citizen 
from Leask here as well -- I'm pleased to present this petition on behalf 
of people from Drake and Leask, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final petition that I will present today is again the same 
prayer, which I will not repeat.  But these are petitioners, Mr. Speaker, a 
number of them from the community of Melfort, Saskatchewan.  Community 
members from Melfort are concerned about the government's intentions to 
proceed with passing the provincial goods and services tax.  Not only 
Melfort -- but there are several from Melfort -- there are also members of 
the public from the community of Humboldt, from Hanley, from Lanigan, from 
Edam, from Hague, and from Loreburn.  Sort of in a sense another atlas of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but rural residents -- and again I repeat, 
several from Melfort -- who are expressing their concern that the 
government is proceeding with the provincial PST and are asking them in a 
very serious way to reverse this decision.  And it's my pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to present this petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan, 
from rural Saskatchewan.  Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11, Mr. 
Speaker, to present a petition to the Assembly on behalf of residents, as 
you will be finding out, from all across this great province of ours.  And 
these petitioners are urging the provincial government to withdraw the 
passage of the provincial GST. 
 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the Province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I am presenting has signatories from Walsh Acres, 
the area of Regina that I live in.  There's a signature here from Moose 
Jaw, Saskatoon, another one from Swift Current, one from the Coronation 
Park area of Regina, Uplands in my constituency.  Here's a signature from 



 

 

the south end of Regina, another one from Saskatoon, one from Briercrest 
out in the Thunder Creek constituency.  Another one from Saskatoon, Regina, 
McLean -- just east of Regina -- a signature from Meadow Lake, North 
Battleford, one from Yorkton, one from Francis, and then back into the 
constituency of Regina Albert North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope this petition won't be ruled out of order because 
there's room for 20 signatures and there is in fact an additional signature 
below it.  But I trust that it will be in order.  I table the petition. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer, so I won't 
repeat that.  This petition is signed exclusively by people on Rink Avenue 
in the constituency of Regina Albert North.  And of course, they're opposed 
to the provincial GST being passed.  And it is my honour and my privilege 
to present this petition in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You mean the new constituency of Regina Albert North. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Yes, with the boundaries dispute, Mr. Speaker, there's some 
concern as to which constituency it is in. 
 
I have a petition here, this one from a block over from Rink Avenue, 
Bannister Avenue, again in Walsh Acres.  I recognize a good number of these 
names, as exclusively every signature is within three blocks of where I 
live, and I'm very, very pleased to present this petition on their behalf 
urging the government to withdraw the . . . stop the passage of the 
provincial GST.  I table that petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition again from the old riding of Regina North 
West, new Regina Albert North, potentially the new.  I believe it's called 
Sherwood Park . . . Regina Sherwood.  At any case, these people are most 
assuredly on the same vein as the previous petitions I have presented 
urging the government not to proceed. 
 
These signatures are, as I mentioned, from Walsh Acres, primarily the 
Tremaine Avenue area, and I notice a Dryburgh Crescent signature.  I know 
that individual quite well and I recognize a good number of other names.  
It is my duty and of course my privilege to present this petition today. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, this time from the constituency of Regina 
North or the constituency of Regina Albert North or potentially Regina 
Churchill Downs if the five-day old boundaries are the ultimate that are 
used.  The signatories on this petition are all from the Uplands area of 
Regina.  An area, as their MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) I 
recognize a great number of the names, and I'm very pleased, Mr. Speaker, 
to table this list of some 24 names.  I'm pleased to table this in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have another petition with the same prayer.  This one also from the 
Uplands area in the constituency of Regina North or Regina Albert North or 
Churchill Downs depending again on what the boundaries decision is -- same 



 

 

prayer opposing the provincial GST.  These signatories come . . . I see a 
number on Weekes Crescent, Chalmers Street, Kleisinger Crescent, which is 
not in Uplands but just north of 9th Avenue North -- there's a series of 
apartments there.  A signature on Broad Street North but primarily, Mr. 
Speaker, from the Uplands area.  It is my duty, pleasure, and honour to 
present this petition. 
 
The next petition that I have, Mr. Speaker, is from residents of Fairview 
Road in Uplands in Regina, Rodenbush Drive, from Catherwood Crescent, 
Jordan Bay.  There's one here from Nollet Avenue which is over in 
Normanview, and then back to Rodenbush Drive.  So as near as I can see, 
with the exception of one signature from the Normanview area of Regina, all 
of these signatories on this petition are from the Uplands area of Regina.  
Again it is my privilege and duty to table this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition also urging the provincial government 
to stop the provincial GST until the election.  This time the signatories 
are from again Rodenbush Drive, 12th Avenue North in Uplands, Upland Drive.  
There's a signature from, I recognize, the west end of the city on Sherwood 
Drive, the 5000 block of Sherwood Drive, Upland Drive, and Fairview Road, 
primarily in the north-east part of Regina.  I table that petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition that I have has . . . again with the same 
prayer.  This time the petitioners are from Tisdale, Melfort, Birch Hills, 
and Hudson Bay, and one from Quinton, Saskatchewan.  From Hudson Bay there 
is six signatures, quite a number of them from Tisdale, and a couple from 
Melfort, one from Birch Hills, and one from Quinton.  But again on behalf 
of the six signatories from Hudson Bay, the multitude from the other places 
mentioned, I am honoured to present this petition today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here that was signed in the 
Argyle Park area in a place of business, actually in a pizzeria there.  So 
the signatures . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm trying to allow the member to 
present his petitions but if we start describing the locations and what 
they look like and everything else, that certainly isn't the normal way of 
presenting petitions. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  These signatories are from, of 
course, Argyle Park.  I recognize some neighbours of mine in Walsh Acres 
and further to the west of the city.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to table 
this petition. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from the Uplands area of Regina -- Norwood 
Crescent, primarily Norwood Crescent, but a few from Fairview Road.  Some 
24 signatories on this petition, Mr. Speaker, and they're urging the 
provincial government stop the provincial GST.  It is my duty, pleasure, 
and honour to table this petition with 24 signatures from the Uplands area 
of Regina to the Legislative Assembly. 
 



 

 

I have a petition again from the Uplands area -- Norwood Crescent, Fairview 
Road, Upland Drive, and a couple of box numbers.  I don't know whether 
that's because they choose to pick up their mail at the post office or 
whether they're in fact Regina rural.  In any case, just two signatures.  
The rest of the 24 signatures are clearly from the Uplands area of Regina. 
 
As their current MLA and I guess potentially, depending on the boundaries 
that are ultimately used, potentially a candidate for the next election and 
hopefully MLA for these people, I am duty-bound to present this petition 
and I do so with a great deal of pride. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from Argyle Park, from the extreme 
north-west portion of the city; some from Uplands; and some signatories I 
recognize as the addresses being the very south end of Regina.  But in any 
case, Mr. Speaker, all the signatures I believe are from Regina in this 
instance, scattered throughout the city.  It is my privilege and pleasure 
to table this petition urging the government to stop the provincial GST 
until after an election.  I'm pleased to table this petition. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from the Coronation Park area of Regina, 
and a few of these signatures are from the Argyle Park and further 
north-west in the member for the current Regina North West's constituency.  
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present this petition urging the provincial 
government to stop the GST until after the election.  I'm delighted to 
table this petition. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from the Saskatoon area.  Fortunately I 
lived in Saskatoon for a total of a year of my life, so I recognize some of 
these addresses.  And in addition to the signatories from Saskatoon there 
are two signatories from Warman, the town of Warman.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased to present this petition, as my colleagues have, from all around 
Saskatchewan, urging the government to not proceed with the provincial 
goods and services tax until after the provincial election is  
 Dcalled.  So on behalf of the 20 petitioners that have signed this, it's 
my pleasure to table the petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from many addresses in Regina -- quite 
a number from the Argyle Park area, and I recognize some also from the 
Uplands area, again some 20 signatures.  Oh, and there's some from the 
Coronation Park area too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are adamantly opposed to the provincial GST, 
which is being rammed down our throats, and they're urging that the 
government not proceed with this unfair tax until after the people have had 
a chance to voice their opinion in a public general election right across 
the province so they can turf the government out.  It's my pleasure to 
table that petition. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatoon and from Clavet and a 
signature from a Watrous address.  These people are opposed to the 
provincial GST and urging the government to not proceed with it until after 
a provincial election.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 20 people from 
Clavet, Watrous, and Saskatoon, it is my duty and my honour to table this 



 

 

petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from a number of addresses -- Argyle Park, I 
recognize an Uplands signature, some to the west of Walsh Acres area in the 
extreme north-west part of the city.  Again, Mr. Speaker, some 20 
signatures collected at a place of business that I cannot describe, 
according to your former ruling.  It's my duty and pleasure to present 
those 20 signatures. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, this time with . . . It's interesting, 
sometimes the size of the spacing changes.  This time there is 24 
signatures from the Uplands area of Regina.  Of course I recognize a fair 
number of these people, having been on their doorstep and having talked 
with them over various issues over the years. 
 
They are obviously supportive of what the opposition is doing in that they 
too join us, or we join them in urging the provincial government to stop 
the provincial GST until after there's been a provincial election, so that 
the people of communities such as Uplands have an opportunity to voice 
their opinion on what is arguably the largest tax grab in Saskatchewan's 
history.  I am pleased to present that petition. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from Melfort and from Saskatoon.  This time 
not 24, but 20 names on this petition, also urging the provincial 
government to stop the provincial GST until the people have had time to 
voice their judgement in a provincial election. 
 
That's the common thread of all of these petitions -- is people are saying: 
not until after the next election.  So on behalf of these 20 people from 
Melfort and Saskatoon, I am pleased to table this petition.  Thank you. 
 
(1145) 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from the Uplands area of Regina . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . .  The member for Regina Centre, thank you for 
listening with interest.  The Uplands area have tabled a huge number of 
petitions from that area today, and I'm far from done. 
 
Again the common thread with all of these people in the Uplands portion of 
Regina is they want the provincial GST . . . the government to stop ramming 
it through, to call an election so that they can voice their concerns and 
decide whether they re-elect the Conservatives and the GST gets rammed down 
their throats, or whether they can elect a New Democratic Party government 
and move to more fair taxation.  Mr. Speaker, I'm delighted to table this 
petition on behalf of my constituents in Uplands. 
 
I have a petition primarily from the Argyle Park area.  In fact I would 
have to say . . . Oh, there is one from Coronation Park and one from down 
in the Rosemont area, but with those two exceptions exclusively from the 
Argyle Park area. 
 
Residents of Argyle Park have been telling me for some time now, they too 
want the GST stopped until after a provincial election, where they will 



 

 

have had a chance in the democratic process to simply say yea or nay by who 
they cast their ballot for.  So, Mr. Speaker, I'm again pleased and duty 
bound to table this petition from the residents of primarily Argyle Park, 
with the two exceptions from other areas of the city. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from again primarily the Argyle Park area.  
But also, I'm pleased to say, some from Walsh Acres.  These people are 
adamantly opposed to what is going on with the ramming of the provincial 
GST.  These people are asking for a provincial election before the GST is 
rammed down the throats and forced on the people of Saskatchewan.  I am 
pleased, Mr. Speaker, to table this petition on behalf of those residents 
of Argyle Park and Walsh Acres. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from the Walsh Acres area, again very near 
to where I live.  These people are urging the provincial government to stop 
the provincial GST until the people of the province have an opportunity to 
pass judgement on it in a provincial election.  These people are very 
concerned with what is happening in our province.  And I won't repeat the 
prayer of this petition, Mr. Speaker, but as you are well aware, this 
petition mirrors the hundreds and thousands of other petitions that have 
been presented by I and my colleagues in this Legislative Assembly.  I am 
delighted on behalf of these people in the Walsh Acres area to table this 
petition opposing the provincial GST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from people in the Uplands area.  I am 
delighted to be able to table this petition.  And the reason I said, 
delighted to be able to table it, is if people didn't sign the petition, if 
people didn't actively go out door-to-door collecting signatures, we would 
very quickly run out of petitions to hand in.  But since the people are 
responding, people are actively going out with petitions, actively getting 
people to sign it and turning them in, that allows us to continue, and it 
allows me to present this petition from the people of the Uplands area of 
Regina.  So I present this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker -- I'll take this one -- I see there are 
signatures on this petition from Christopher Lake, from . . . it says 
Wiggins.  I'm assuming that's Wiggins, yes, in Saskatoon.  Because there's 
also Dufferin Avenue, McKinnon, Reindeer Road -- Reindeer Road up in the 
north-east portion of the city of Saskatoon.  I actually know that area 
fairly well, my parents having lived there for a few years.  And there's 
some signatures here from the east side of the city as well.  Twenty 
signatures this time, Mr. Speaker, and I'm duty-bound and honoured to 
present this petition on behalf of these 20 people. 
 
I have a petition primarily from the Argyle Park area of the Regina city.  
Argyle Park, interestingly enough, is in Regina North, in Regina Albert 
North, or in Regina North Albert.  It's in all three, so it matters not . . 
. These people will be part of one of those constituencies when the 
boundaries dispute is finally resolved. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And are likely to be well represented in this 
legislature. 
 



 

 

Mr. Trew: -- And I thank my colleague from Regina Centre for saying they 
are likely to be well represented in the legislature.  If they're willing, 
I'm certainly willing to run.  I hope they're willing to vote for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's 20 names from Argyle Park, some from Walsh Acres I 
notice, and some from Uplands but primarily Argyle Park.  Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to present these 20 signatures on their behalf. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from the Upland Drive, Elmview, and a 
signature here from Silton, which would be of I think some interest to the 
Speaker of this Legislative Assembly, that being in his constituency -- 
Last Mountain-Touchwood.  These people, Mr. Speaker, are just vehemently 
opposed to this GST that is being rammed down their throat with the use of 
closure in this legislature. 
 
These people are asking the provincial government to stop this madness, 
stop the GST until after they've had their democratic right to vote in an 
election and to say yes or no to the antics of the government and indeed to 
pass judgement on all of the goings-on.  These people, primarily from the 
Uplands area, are obviously opposed to the GST.  And it's my pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to present these petitions on their behalf. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatoon, and I recognize many of the 
addresses.  I would describe it as the south-east side of the river 
primarily, and I apologize to anyone on the other side of the river that 
may have signed it, but primarily the south-east side of Saskatoon.  Again 
a full petition, 20 signatures, urging the provincial government to stop 
the provincial GST. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member is entering into debate.  I'd ask 
him not to enter into debate.  The Speaker has ruled on that earlier -- 
that there's no debate on the presenting of petitions.  The prayer will be 
read once and then the petitions can be presented. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will try and abide by your ruling.  
These 20 people from Saskatoon are in the same vein as the number of other 
petitions presented today -- the same prayer and the same issue, that being 
the GST. 
 
It is my . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I've warned the member once and if he does 
it again, I will go to the next speaker. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I am sorry, Mr. Speaker.  I gather it's the last three letters 
that was a concern in what I just said.  Is it proper for me ask that of 
you?  I'm uncertain . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- The member is on his feet presenting petitions.  He 
is allowed to read the prayer and present the petitions.  He has read the 
prayer once; now he can continue to present the petitions with no comments. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of these 20 people from 



 

 

Saskatoon, it is my pleasure to present this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from the Uplands area in the constituency of 
Regina North -- Elmview Road, Upland Drive, Oakview Drive, and that general 
area.  It is my duty and my honour and my privilege to present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from the Uplands area of Regina, Oakview Bay 
this time, from primarily Oakview Bay.  I see there is a signature from 
Dalgleish Drive, which is obviously not in Uplands, for any of you familiar 
with Regina geography; it is in Regina North West.  And it is my duty, 
privilege, pleasure to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition from again Regina North West, from the 
Walsh Acres area, Argyle Park, Coronation Park; indeed it seems to be quite 
representative of Regina.  This petition came from an indescribable 
pizzeria in Argyle Park, and it is my honour to present this petition on 
behalf of the 20 signatures in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition from people from Wishart, from Regina.  
Indeed a good number of these are in the south-east part of Regina.  This 
petition -- and some from rural Regina -- this petition is in the same vein 
as the other petitions I have presented today.  And it is my privilege and 
honour and duty to table this petition in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition, this time from Saskatoon -- varied 
addresses in Saskatoon and one from . . . it looks like Tugaske to me -- 
with the exception of the one signature from Tugaske, 19 others from 
Saskatoon.  It is my pleasure to table this petition to join the thousands 
of other petitions that have been presented by my colleagues and I in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I have a petition, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatoon, Unity and then back to 
Saskatoon, 20 signatures on a petition with the same prayer as the other 
petitions that I have presented in the Legislative Assembly this day.  Mr. 
Speaker, I'm pleased on behalf of these 20 people to add their names to the 
ever-growing list of people that are petitioning this Legislative Assembly 
respecting what these petitions are all about, the prayer of which I read 
earlier. 
 
A petition, Mr. Speaker, I'm nearing . . . I've a couple more that I wish 
to present.  This petition is from the Uplands area, Oakview Drive, 
Spruceview Road, and I mentioned Oakview Drive already.  These signatures, 
these people are joining, as I mentioned, the ever-growing list of people 
that are signing the petition that we are tabling in the Legislative 
Assembly on their behalf.  And it is my pleasure and privilege to present 
this petition. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to present my last petition for this day of 
here people having signed from again the Uplands area, Coronation Park, and 
on Angus Road, a signature from the south-east portion of the city of 
Regina in the constituency of Regina Wascana, signatures from Regina North 
West, a signature from Moose Jaw.  And I know that will be of particular 



 

 

interest to my two colleagues from Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been my pleasure today to table a number of the 
petitions that we have respecting this petition.  I want to abide by your 
ruling.  It's been my pleasure to add many hundreds of names in total to 
the growing list of people who are petitioning this government, urging it 
to stop passage of the GST until after the election. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
It's my pleasure to rise pursuant to rule 11 of the Legislative Assembly 
which provides for the tabling of petitions to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
In this case the petitions I wish to table today are virtually, yes, are 
identical in terms of what it is that the petitioners are saying.  And 
these petitioners are concerned that the Government of Saskatchewan does 
not have a mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to impose a major tax 
increase which would result from the proposed provincial GST.  And 
therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are petitioning the Legislative 
Assembly with the following: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of Saskatchewan have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. And as in duty bound your petitioners will 
ever pray. 

 
And I should just point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these are petitions 
from people of Saskatchewan to the Legislative Assembly to all of the 
members of the Legislative Assembly asking the Legislative Assembly to urge 
the provincial government to stop the GST. 
 
So they are asking us as members to put pressure on the government to do 
something.  And this petition I have here before me, Mr. Speaker, there's 
about 10 names or so -- they're all from the city of Moose Jaw.  There are 
no addresses on here, but the names are clearly printed, so there can be no 
doubt as to who these people are, and they're clearly from the city of 
Moose Jaw.  Oh no, there's one here from Saskatoon as well, Mr. Speaker.  
And it's my pleasure to lay that petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this next petition I have -- a group of names, there's 20 
names in all -- may again seem to be from the city of Moose Jaw.  There's 
one here from Bushell Park which is just outside of Moose Jaw I understand.  
And there's also one name here from Yorkton.  I assume that person was 
visiting someone in Moose Jaw when the petition was being passed around and 
being signed by people.  And again all the names are clearly printed.  And 
I've signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, to ensure, as per rule 11, that the 
petition is in order.  And it's my pleasure to lay that one on the Table, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition I have, as near as I can determine, the 
names are all from the city of Regina: Knowles Crescent, Garnet Street, La 



 

 

Verendrye Way.  No, there's some names here from Saskatoon as well, Mr. 
Speaker.  The names are all clearly printed, and it's my pleasure to lay 
these six names before the Legislative Assembly. 
 
This next petition, Mr. Speaker, has three names on it, one being from 
Quincy Drive in Regina, the other two being from Parker Avenue in Regina 
which is in the south end, I believe in the constituency of the member for 
Regina South, so that he will be pleased to know that there are people in 
his constituency who are expressing their concerns in petition form to the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
These next three names are all from Darke Crescent in Regina, Mr. Speaker, 
and it's my pleasure as well to lay their names before the Legislative 
Assembly.  The petition form has been signed by myself so as to assure the 
Legislative Assembly that the petition is in order as far as I can 
ascertain, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This next group of names, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are all from Regina, Uhrich 
Avenue, 29th Avenue, L'Arche Crescent.  Unless I'm mistaken, those are also 
from the constituency of Regina South and would be a matter of interest to 
the member for Regina South.  And it's my pleasure to lay those names on 
the Table. 
 
As is the case with the next three names which are from Knowles Crescent 
and 24th Avenue in Regina.  And I believe all these names are in order, Mr. 
Speaker, and I'll sign my name to them. 
 
This next group again seems to be from the south end of the city of Regina, 
Mr. Speaker, petitions from Saskatchewan residents who are expressing their 
concerns from King Street and from L'Arche Crescent, Shaw Street, Portnall 
Avenue, I believe it is, and L'Arche Crescent here in the city of Regina.  
And it's my pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to convey their concerns to the 
Legislative Assembly so that in turn the Legislative Assembly, in this 
fashion, may convey the concerns of these people of Saskatchewan to the 
government of the day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This next group of names I have, Mr. Speaker, almost all seem to be from 
the city of Saskatoon, although there is one name here from the town of 
Bradwell, I believe it is.  It's a nice little town.  I'm not quite clear 
where it is but I believe it's close to Saskatoon.  And it's my pleasure to 
also put these names before the Legislative Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This next group of names, Mr. Speaker, would seem to be primarily from 
people of Moose Jaw but not exclusively so.  There are some exceptions to 
this.  Here's one from Claybank, Saskatchewan.  Here's a name from Spring 
Valley, Saskatchewan, which I believe is to the south of Moose Jaw close to 
the Avonlea area of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And all the rest seem to be 
from Moose Jaw -- 7th Avenue North East, Coteau Street West, River Street 
East -- and of course we're all familiar with River Street -- Athabasca.  
And it's my pleasure to present those names to the Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This next group of names, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of Prince 



 

 

Albert.  And it is clear that the people of Prince Albert, these 20 people 
here, also have concerns similar to those that have been expressed by other 
petitioners, and wish to have their concerns conveyed to the government 
through the medium of this rule 11 provision through the Legislative 
Assembly.  And it's my pleasure to present their names on their behalf, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the next group of names I have are also primarily from 
Prince Albert, although there are a couple of names from La Ronge, 
Saskatchewan, just to show you that we've had petitioners from the South 
and now we have them from the North, which I think indicates that there are 
people from all over Saskatchewan who are expressing their concerns and 
wanting to have their concerns conveyed to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker.  And it's my pleasure to present this petition on behalf of the 
very many petitioners to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This next group of names, Mr. Speaker . . .  I'm going to make some 
assumptions here that most of these names are from the city of Saskatoon -- 
East Place, Albert Avenue, Clare Crescent, Ruth Street -- yes, Ruth Street 
is in Saskatoon -- Arlington Avenue.  Here's one, 102nd Street in 
Saskatoon, Calder Crescent.  I believe that all . . . No, there's one here 
from La Ronge, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but all the rest would appear to 
be from the city of Saskatoon.  All have printed their names on the form, 
they've signed them, indicated their addresses.  It's quite clear that this 
petition is very much in order pursuant to rule 11 and I've signed it to 
indicate that, and it's my privilege to lay this petition on the Table 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this next petition that I have is from 2501 Louise Street 
which is an apartment block.  I believe it's the Scott-Forget Towers in 
Saskatoon.  And I would not be surprised if that were a senior citizens 
complex in the city of Saskatoon, although I stand to be corrected on that.  
But in any event, Mr. Speaker, some 21 residents of Scott-Forget Towers 
have printed their names and have signed their names, given their address, 
and are joining with many others to convey their concerns to the 
Legislative Assembly so that in turn that these might be passed on to the 
government. 
 
And I'm very pleased and honoured to present their names to the Legislative 
Assembly today.  And I've signed the petition on behalf of the residents of 
Scott-Forget Towers in Saskatoon.  I've signed the petition to make clear 
that these names are all in order, Mr. Speaker.  And it's my pleasure to 
present these names today. 
 
The next group of names I have, Mr. Speaker, are all . . . seem to be from 
. . . or most seem to be from 1319 Rae Street in Regina.  And I would not 
be surprised, Mr. Speaker, although I stand to be corrected in saying this, 
that this again is another senior citizens' development in this case, in 
Regina.  There's one further signature here from someone on Rochdale 
Boulevard, no doubt visiting people at 1319 Rae Street.  Again I stand to 
be corrected but I believe that is a senior citizens' development in the 
constituency of Regina Elphinstone, I believe it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

And I'm pleased that the people in that complex found the time to express 
their concerns to the members of the Legislative Assembly and to make their 
feelings known in this way by clearly printing their names and then signing 
their names as well, and clearly indicating their address.  This is a 
wonderful exercise in democracy, Mr. Speaker, and I'm just delighted to 
present their names today to the members of the Legislative Assembly 
gathered here on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This next group of names, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from Regina, from 
Queen Street and from Montague Street and from the Glen Elm Trailer Court 
here in Regina, Mr. Speaker.  But there are also a couple of names from 
Leross, Saskatchewan, just to the north of Saskatchewan and it's my 
pleasure to also submit these names to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have 20 names here signed and most are printed clearly as 
well.  They seem to be residents of Prince Albert, although there are some 
names here from St. Louis, Saskatchewan, just south of Prince Albert by the 
river there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1215) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member seems to be taking a great deal 
of time giving us a lesson in geography of Saskatchewan which I don't think 
is necessary during the tabling of the petitions -- order, order, the 
member for Regina Centre. 
 
I don't think the member has the right to drag out the proceedings by 
giving us lessons in geography on Saskatchewan.  I'd ask the member to 
continue to place his petitions on the Table without extra comments. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I certainly 
respect your ruling in that regard.  I was only trying to indicate to 
members where some of these names came from and . . . But I'll certainly 
respect your ruling.  I would just simply say that in addition to the 
people of Prince Albert, Saskatchewan who have signed this form, there's 
also one signature here from Crystal Springs, Mr. Speaker.  And it's my 
pleasure to lay these names before the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now this next one I have, Mr. Speaker, it . . . I'm hoping that this one 
will be sufficient.  The original petition form has 20 names on it and I've 
signed that, but someone has added to that with another separate sheet of 
paper and they've affixed it, and I'm satisfied that all these names are in 
order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of the names seem to be from . . . or almost all of the names seem to 
be from one apartment building in Saskatoon at 2602 Taylor Street.  And I'm 
not familiar with the building itself but it looks like someone went to a 
lot of effort to get signatures of many if not all of the residents of 2602 
Taylor Street in Saskatoon. 
 
And I might say that I applaud their initiative in making do with the one 
form and adding your own, and that it's my very great pleasure to present 



 

 

these names to the Legislative Assembly on behalf of a group of people in 
Saskatchewan who are obviously very concerned about the issue of this 
petition.  And it's my pleasure to lay this one on the Table today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the next group of names I have are from Regina and 
Findlater, Saskatchewan, and there's one here from the . . . it looks like 
they're from business people at the Galleria here in Regina.  Another name 
from Bond Street, which is in the constituency of Regina Victoria, Mr. 
Speaker.  But in the main these are names from residents of Regina, 
Saskatchewan, who want their concerns conveyed to the Legislative Assembly, 
concerns in keeping with the prayer of petition that I read earlier to the 
members today, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I might say that it's my very great 
pleasure to lay these names of residents of Regina and Findlater on the 
Table, to present these today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the next group of names I have all seem to be from the 
constituency of Regina Elphinstone, addresses such as Cameron Street and 
600 block Athol Street.  And it looks like someone was going door to door 
getting people to sign up here.  I want to applaud them for taking 
advantage of the rules of the Assembly to make their concerns known, 
concerns in keeping with the prayer of petition that I mentioned earlier, 
and to convey their concerns in this way.  And it's my very great pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, to lay this particular petition -- these 15, 16 names -- on 
the Table today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This next group of names, Mr. Speaker . . .  I recognize the first name on 
the form.  And it looks like he's taken it around and gotten 20 signatures 
or so -- 20 signatures of residents of Regina.  I'm very pleased to lay 
these before the Assembly.  I might say that all the names are, or almost 
all the names, are printed clearly and the signatures seem to be okay.  I'm 
pleased to sign the form and to attest personally that I think they're in 
order, and to lay these names on the Table today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this next group of names I have I believe are all from 
the fine city of Moose Jaw.  Although I stand to be corrected again.  But 
yes, it appears that all these names are from Moose Jaw, from Stadacona 
Street West, Grandview, Cartier Avenue, Albert Street -- I believe there's 
an Albert Street in Moose Jaw -- Vaughan Street West, King Crescent.  Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it's my pleasure to add this list of 21 names on top of the 
hundreds if not thousands of names that have already been presented to the 
Legislative Assembly, in the matter of the prayer that I earlier read out 
to the Legislative Assembly and the preamble which I had indicated in the 
subject area.  And it's my pleasure to also lay their names on the Table 
before you today, sir. 
 
This next group of names I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all seem to be 
from the city of Regina.  Oh, there's one here from Pense, Saskatchewan.  
But there's addresses here from Academy Park Road, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which as you know is in Regina South, in the constituency of Regina South, 
a hotbed of NDP support in the city. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The member is entering into debate.  



 

 

I will warm him once and then I will go to the next speaker if he continues 
to do that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I appreciate 
your ruling, but the member for Regina South . . . I know in debate you can 
respond to heckling, but in this case . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Next speaker.  Next speaker. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise also under rule 11 to 
exercise my democratic right as a member of the legislature to present 
petitions to this legislature on behalf of the people of the province. 
 
I have this petition and it's regarding the goods and services tax, the 
legislation that is being brought in here under the threat of closure.  And 
so this petition . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- The member can read the prayer on the petition and 
present the petition to the House without going into debate.  It's clear in 
rule 11: "On the presentation of petition no debate on or in relation to 
the same shall be allowed." 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this petition the petitioners are 
humbly praying 
 

 . . . that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial 
Government to stop the provincial GST until the people of the province 
have had an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial election. 

 
And the people who have signed this petition come from the city of 
Saskatoon, which I'm pleased to represent in here in the legislature.  They 
come from a number of areas of the city -- McKinnon Avenue, 5th Street 
East, Main Street, Tait Crescent, Coy Avenue, Moxon Crescent, Arlington 
Avenue, Begg Crescent, Lansdowne Avenue, and a number of other streets in 
Saskatoon.  I have signed this petition and I'm pleased to present it to 
the legislature on their behalf. 
 
Another petition on the same subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this one also 
from Saskatoon, from areas like Main Street, 10th Street, Zeman Court, 
Wilson Crescent, Anglin Place, Morgan Avenue, and there is a signature on  
 Dhere from Allan, Saskatchewan.  And I am pleased to present this on 
behalf of the petitioners.  I have signed it; it looks in good order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition from the city of Saskatoon on the same 
topic, this one coming from a number of streets.  It may have been one of 
the petitions that we collected in front of Midtown Plaza, because the 
people are coming from . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member is not to get into debate.  The 
member has read the prayer, can now present the petitions, lay the 
petitions on the Table. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- These petitions come from Spinks Drive, 8th Street, 10th 



 

 

Street, Dufferin Avenue, Broadway Avenue, Acadia Drive, Delaronde Road, 9th 
Street East, Forest Drive, Victoria Avenue, 8th Street, Munroe Avenue, and 
Wilson Street.  I am pleased to present these petitions.  They look in 
order and I've signed them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition on the same subject from the city of 
Saskatoon, from Broadway Avenue, Avenue E North, 28th Street West, Brown 
Crescent, 8th Avenue North, 12th Street East, Canora Street in Warman, 
Clover Street in Dalmeny, Saskatchewan; Saskatoon, 11th Street, 12th 
Street, 5th Street, 4th Street; two signatures on here from Big River, 
Saskatchewan; the others from Main Street, 4th Street, and Avenue I North.  
They look in order, and I've signed this petition and present them on 
behalf of the people. 
 
Another petition on the same subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker, also from the 
city of Saskatoon -- from people on Broadway Avenue, Clinkskill Drive, 
Idlywyld Crescent, Heritage Way, 10th Street, 25th Street, Simpson 
Crescent, Lorne Avenue, 2nd Avenue North, and University Drive.  It looks 
in order and I've signed it and present it on behalf of the people of 
Saskatoon. 
 
And another petition on the same subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again from 
the city of Saskatoon, with one signature from Beauval, Saskatchewan.  The 
others come from Saskatoon, again from across the city -- McPherson Avenue, 
Dufferin, 8th Street East, 13th Street East, Broadway, Lancaster, Lorne 
Avenue, Saguenay Drive, Bateman Crescent, Eastlake, 6th Street East.  And I 
present this full petition of 20 signatures, also written and printed, and 
I present it on behalf of the people in Saskatoon who've asked me to do so.  
Thank you. 
 
Another petition on the same subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Most of the 
signatures on here are also from Saskatoon.  There is a signature here from 
Hepburn, one from Hafford, and the others from areas in Saskatoon.  I've 
signed this and I present it on behalf of the people of the city. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are presenting these petitions.  Another one I have 
on the same subject, and I present it here in the Legislative Assembly so 
that the members opposite and the people here -- all of us as the 
Legislative Assembly -- will have a chance to see them.  They come from 
Saskatoon -- Temperance Street, Adilman Drive, Montreal Avenue, Tobin 
Crescent, 8th Street East, McCormack Road, 105th Street East, from 
Eastview, from 4th Avenue North, 5th Avenue North, 10th Street East, 7th 
Street East, Avenue H North, Spadina Crescent, and Diefenbaker Drive. All 
signatures from Saskatoon, all in order, and I've signed this petition 
presented on behalf of those people. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is another petition on the same subject also from 
the city of Saskatoon.  The people in this petition come from a number of 
areas of the city.  It looks like 33rd Street West, Avenue X, Avenue O, 
Grey Place, Avenue P, Avenue D, Avenue H South, and Highway Place and 
Pendygrasse Road.  I present this petition on behalf of those people. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition from the city of 
Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This petition has 12 signatures on it from 
the city of Saskatoon, and I have signed it and I present it on behalf of 
those people.  It's on the same topic as the other petitions. 
 
Another petition with 12 signatures on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again from 
the city of Saskatoon on the same topic as the other petitions that we have 
been presenting.  The people from this petition live on Avenue H North, 
Avenue I, 33rd Street, Avenue X, Avenue N South, Diefenbaker Drive, 
Clarence South, 24th Street West, 21st Street East, 5th Avenue North and 
21st Street East, and there is one signature from Grandora, Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to present a petition on behalf of 20 
people who come from the town of Watrous, Saskatchewan.  They too are 
concerned about the same topic as the other petitioners.  And this is a 
full petition of 20 signatures from the town of Watrous.  They have written 
their names.  They have written their signatures, printed their names, and 
indicated where they're from.  And I have signed this petition and present 
it to the Assembly on behalf of 20 petitioners from Watrous. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition that I am now presenting also has 20 
signatures on it.  And a number of the people on this petition on the same 
topic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the other petitions, have asked me to present 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
And these are people from the town of Watrous.  There are two signatures 
here from the town of Shellbrook. There are signatures from Young, 
Saskatchewan, and two from Regina, so petitions from across the province.  
And I'm pleased to present these on behalf of the petitioners to the 
Legislative Assembly for our consideration.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition, again with 20 
signatures, on the same topic as the others that we have presented.  The 
people on this petition also live in Watrous, Saskatchewan.  There is a 
signature here from Grayson, Saskatchewan, and there is a signature here 
from Viscount, Saskatchewan.  All the others are from Watrous, all signed 
and printed, a full 20 signatures.  And I'm proud to present them and it is 
my duty to present them to the Legislative Assembly for our consideration.  
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this next petition comes again from the city of 
Saskatoon and contains the signatures and the printed names of people who 
come from a number of places in the city.  There is a signature from 22nd 
Street, from 3rd Avenue South, from Avenue H South, Avenue P South, Fisher 
Crescent, Avenue T South, Avenue O South, Leif Erickson Place, Avenue J 
North, 23rd Street West, Avenue I South, Avenue R South, and Avenue S 
South.  And I'm pleased to present this petition with my signature on it as 
well for consideration of the Legislative Assembly. 



 

 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition from Saskatoon, this one 2, 4, 6, 
8, 10, 12 names on it.  This petition has a signature from R.R. 6 outside 
Saskatoon, from Ste. Cecelia Street in Saskatoon, 5th Street, Junor Avenue, 
and one from Clavet, Saskatchewan.  But the others are from Saskatoon, 
Langevin Crescent, Main Street East, Avenue S South, and 6th Avenue North.  
And I'm pleased to present these petitions on behalf of these petitioners 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The next petition that I have also on this same subject, Mr. Speaker, I'm 
presenting on behalf of petitioners from Saskatoon, but also from other 
communities.  There's a signature here from Hepburn, Saskatchewan, from 
Martensville, from Vanscoy, from Blaine Lake, from 25th Street West in 
Saskatoon, Avenue T North in Saskatoon, Avenue R North in Saskatoon, and 
two that indicate that they are in Saskatoon but that is the extent of the 
declaration as to where these signatures come from.  But I am pleased to 
present them with my signature for the consideration of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Another petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the same subject again.  And as a 
member of the legislature, I'm pleased to present it on behalf of the 
petitioners.  There are 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 signatures on this petition -- most 
of them from Saskatoon, but there's a signature from Martensville and one 
from Vanscoy.  And I'm pleased to present these petitions, as it is my duty 
to do so, to the Legislative Assembly for our consideration, and I present 
them to us today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- I have another petition again on the same subject; on the 
same subject 20 people have signed this petition.  In fact some have 
doubled up so there's more than 20 on this petition, and they have printed 
their names and written their signatures.  And they indicate on this 
petition that they come from Raymore, Saskatchewan; from Wiseton, 
Saskatchewan.  There are some from Saskatoon, a number from Watrous again, 
and one from Colonsay, Saskatchewan  
_- two actually from Colonsay.  And I have signed this petition and present 
it to the Assembly on behalf of the petitioners for our consideration. 
 
This petition that I have to present now is also on the same subject, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and it contains the full 20 signatures, also printed.  And 
the people on this petition come from Watrous, Saskatchewan again, one from 
Simpson, Saskatchewan, but all the others are from Watrous.  And on their 
behalf as petitioners to the Assembly, I present this petition for our 
consideration today. 
 
And I have now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a petition again on the same subject; a 
full petition of 20 signatures printed with their names and with their 
signatures and where they come from, and they indicate on this petition 
that they are people living in Watrous, someone from Outlook, someone from 
Melville, and someone from Young . . . two signatures from Young, 
Saskatchewan, and one from Yorkton.  A full 20 petitioners who ask that 
their voices be heard by this Legislative Assembly and so I present this 



 

 

petition on their behalf. 
 
And again a petition on the same subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This 
petition is also full -- 20 names printed and signed -- and an indication 
that they come from Watrous, Saskatchewan; Nokomis, Saskatchewan; Simpson, 
Saskatchewan; Young, Saskatchewan; and a number from Watrous on this 
petition on the same subject urging that we accept this petition to the 
Legislative Assembly today.  And I present it on their behalf. 
 
Turning now, Mr. Speaker, to a petition again on the same subject.  This 
petition contains signatures from the city of Saskatoon.  And I present on 
their behalf signatures and names from people who live on Dufferin Avenue, 
6th Avenue North, 5th Avenue North, 11th Street West, and it looks like 4th 
Street East.  I present this petition on their behalf. 
 
On this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is on the same topic, there are 
three signatures.  Three is the minimum number that can be presented on a 
petition, so I have signed this petition because there are three names.  
They are printed and with a signature, and they all come from the city of 
Saskatoon.  It's on the same topic.  And I present them for the 
consideration of this Assembly as it is my duty to do as a member of this 
Legislative Assembly.  I do so today with pleasure. 
 
And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition with three signatures from 
Spadina Crescent in Saskatoon and 5th Street East in Saskatoon.  As I've 
said, three is the minimum on a petition, but this petition seems in order 
with the printed name, the written name, and the address.  And so I've 
signed them, and I am pleased to present them on behalf of the petitioners 
from Saskatoon. 
 
Another petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the city of Saskatoon, again 
with the names printed and signed, and an indication that the petitioners 
on this petition on the same topic as we've been considering the petitions 
that I've presented already.  This one comes from people living on Columbia 
Drive, Cumberland Avenue South, 8th Street East, Confederation Drive, 2nd 
Street East, and Brightsand Way in Saskatoon.  And I am pleased to present 
this petition on behalf of the petitioners concerned about the topic we've 
been mentioning.  I present it to the Assembly today for your 
consideration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- This petition that I have to present is again on the same 
subject.  It contains two, four, six, seven signatures -- all from 
Saskatoon, all printed and signed as appropriate.  And I've signed them and 
I present them for our consideration today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the petition that I have now to present is also on the 
same topic.  It comes from people in Saskatoon.  And there's a signature 
here from Biggar, Saskatchewan.  All on the same topic as I said.  And it 
is my duty and pleasure as a member of the legislature to present this to 
the Assembly today. 
 



 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition on the same subject.  And this 
one also from Saskatoon, from people living on 11th Street East, Highlands 
Court, and 8th Street East, signed appropriately, and so I have signed it 
appropriately.  And as it is my duty as a member of the legislature, I 
present this petition for our consideration today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1245) 
 
Ms. Smart: -- And finally, Mr. Speaker, another petition.  This is the last 
one that I have to present today, but this one is on the same topic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- It contains signatures from Hilliard Street East and Dominion 
Crescent in Saskatoon, and there's a name here from the community of 
Martensville. 
 
And so I am pleased on behalf of those petitioners to present this petition 
to the Legislative Assembly, along with all the others that I presented 
today, for our consideration as members of the legislature.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise today 
pursuant to rule 11 to present petitions to the Assembly on behalf of the 
residents of Saskatchewan.  And the petitioners that I have here humbly 
pray: 
 

 That we the undersigned support the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax on 
Reading in opposition to tax on books, magazines, and newspapers.  We 
believe that a tax on reading is a tax on knowledge and information, and 
is detrimental to our society.  Traditionally books, magazines, and 
newspapers in Canada have been exempt from sales taxes because Canadians 
have recognized the cultural, social, educational values of the written 
word.  The proposed provincial tax on reading will be the only one of its 
kind in Canada.  The Saskatchewan government's proposal to add a 7% 
provincial tax on top of the new 7% GST on books and periodicals will mean 
that readers in Saskatchewan will be among the highest taxed in the world. 

 
And the petitioners that I have here today, they urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan to repeal this tax.  And the petitioners on this petition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, come from such communities as Ituna, Hubbard, and Hendon.  
I now lay this on the Table, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have a number of petitioners also on this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and they are also opposed to the tax on reading material.  And they come . 
. . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to draw a point of order in the 



 

 

repetitious petitions that we . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I'd 
ask him to quit interfering with the debate so that the Chair has a chance 
to hear what's going on. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Drawing to the point of order, in regards to the privilege 
as me as a private member here in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and because 
of that privilege . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- The member for Regina Centre now is trying to 
interfere with the debate, and I'd ask him to refrain from that also. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Because of that privilege taken away from me as a member, 
Mr. Speaker, I rise here and I'd like to quote rule (9) in our handbook, 
Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

 No petition can be received which prays for any expenditure, grant or 
charge on the public revenue, whether payable out of the Consolidated Fund 
or out of moneys to be provided by the Assembly. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to draw upon this that because of the petitions 
and their pertaining to . . . what could pertain to be direct expenditures 
from the Consolidated Fund are out of order.  I'd like to give an 
indication here, Mr. Speaker, and draw some points to why I believe that 
these funds will be directly related at one particular time to the 
Consolidated Fund. 
 
I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that I have listened to members opposite 
with their prayer.  And what they are saying here, Mr. Speaker, is that 
those particular . . . that the government is supposed to or should 
withdraw a Bill that pertains to the administration of government here in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  It, Mr. Speaker, relates to the point . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well members opposite, if they'd listen and let me make my points, I'll 
listen and let them make theirs.  I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I 
give you an instance of cheques that were drawn from the Consolidated Fund 
that have been sent out to low-income families across this province in 
excess of $7 million.  Mr. Speaker, those dollars are related directly to 
Bill 61. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The question before the Assembly now is the 
presentation of petitions, not -- order -- not the Bill.  The point of 
order you're making is on the presentation of petitions.  I'd like the 
member to stay on that subject on his point of order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With that point, Mr. Speaker, the 
petition itself is dealing with I believe Bill 61.  I guess I'm not allowed 
to ask you to get into the debate but could you clarify how far I could go 
to draw my remarks regarding this.  Because the way I relate to it, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the prayer that they're reciting on those petitions have a 
direct impact on the funds of the Consolidated Fund, and it's very 



 

 

difficult to relate to that petition prayer if you're not allowed to give 
an example. 
 
And I don't know how far I can go because I don't know when you're going to 
call me to order.  So if you allow me the opportunity to speak, and if 
you'd like to call me to order, I will accept your ruling. 
 
I think probably, when you look at the moneys that -- under rule 9 here -- 
that are given the nod for expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund, it's 
on rule . . . which it says in rule 11, subsection (9), it definitely has 
an impact on Bill 61.  And that prayer there is asking the Government of 
Saskatchewan to withdraw Bill 61 where funds have already been withdrawn 
from the Consolidated Fund and given to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am under the understanding then, sir, that members of the opposition of 
the NDP are soliciting the Government of Saskatchewan to withdraw Bill 61 
under that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Bill 61 is not on the debate.  Your point of 
order is on the presentation of the petitions.  And I would ask you to stay 
on the presentation of petitions, not the legislation. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On the presentation of Bill 61, 
the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The petition is what's before the . . . The 
point of order is on the petition. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Yes, on the -- I forgot the word there -- on the 
presentation of the petition for the removal of Bill 61, sir, has a direct 
impact then on those funds that had been distributed through the 
Consolidated Fund.  And by that petition, the petition is requesting that 
Bill . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Bill 61 is not before the House at this 
time.  The petitions and the presentation of the petitions is what you're 
making your point of order on.  I ask the member for the last time to keep 
his comments on the point of order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Okay.  The petition, the petition is to the Government of 
Saskatchewan about the Bill, about Bill . . . Okay, Mr. Speaker, I guess 
I'm not understanding what you're saying and I have that right to get an 
understanding from what you're saying. 
 
I'm referring to the prayer of the petition.  They are tabling petitions in 
this Assembly referring to Bill 61.  Now I have a right to know if they are 
referring to Bill 61 and I have a right to know if they are referring . . . 
if that petition is referring to rule 11(9). 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Okay, I want to speak 
directly to the point of order as contained in rule 11(9) and I want to 
congratulate the member opposite for the ingenuity in terms of this point 
of order.  But I would like to . . . 



 

 

 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's remarks should be to the point 
of order directly. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was extending the courtesy but 
. . . directly on the point of order 11(9) says: 
 

 No petition can be received which prays for any expenditure, grant or 
charge on the public revenue, whether payable out of the Consolidated Fund 
or out of moneys to be provided by the Assembly. 

 
It's my understanding, and I've listened to a great many petitions 
presented here to the House over the last little while, that none of the 
petitions pray for any expenditure, grant or charge on the public revenue.  
In fact it does the exact opposite.  It deals with revenue that has not yet 
entered into the Consolidated Fund.  So I would ask that the Speaker rule 
the member out of order, and once again I want to congratulate the member 
on that ingenuity for his point. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I find the point of order not well taken.  
It's a petition of grievance against the proposed tax, and the petitions 
are in order. 
 
And being near 1 o'clock, the House will stand adjourned until 2 p.m. on 
Monday. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 


