





























































Hansard: April 15, 1991


 

 

April 15/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 
Federal Funding for Agriculture (continued) 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  At the conclusion of my 
brief remarks I'll be moving an amendment to this government resolution.  
An amendment, Mr. Speaker, which we on this side believe more accurately 
reflects the true state of affairs with respect to this specific issue of 
the third line of defence, and an amendment which more accurately reflects 
what the farmers and the rural community see are the needs with respect to 
this third line of defence.  And I'll save the reading of the motion until 
the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, but I simply alert you, sir, and 
all the other members of the House that we will be moving this amendment. 
 
At the outset, Mr. Speaker, let me say with some considerable sadness that 
I find it confusing and in a sense almost unconscionable, if not 
unforgivable, that this debate today on April 15, 1991, is even necessary.  
This payment on the third line of defence, Mr. Speaker, should have been in 
the hands of the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan long ago.  We 
should not have been debating, as we were this afternoon, a motion which 
calls on the federal government to pass the money along to the farmers; 
which by the way I might just say in passing, a motion which has sort of a 
subtle implication to it that maybe Ottawa won't be coming through with 
money, even though we know by the popular press that Ottawa has indicated 
that in fact such money will be coming quite quickly, quite expeditiously 
-- after eight months. 
 
The need here for farmers is obviously crucial and it's urgent and it's 
desperate, and the need for cash for spring seeding is today.  It was 
actually one month ago, two months ago.  And I find it, Mr. Speaker, as I 
said, unconscionable, unforgivable.  I find it sad.  In some ways I find 
the statements of the Premier to be almost pathetic in the recitation of 
the past policies and past actions, all the while refusing to speak of 
course to the urgent need which is before us. 
 
So the most important thing, I think, that needs to be made, and what this 
resolution does not say, is that this payment needs to have been made and 
that this debate, in a sense, is an exercise which I can only describe as 
an exercise in political objectives or political purpose, occasioned by a 
government which has been very tardy on this important aspect of the farm 
crisis. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the fact that there has been delay, I think, is beyond 
any debate whatsoever.  We know that in September of 1990, for example -- 
and let's take a moment to refresh the members' memories -- that in 
September of 1990 the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool spoke on this issue of the 
third line of defence. 
 
I would remind the members, Mr. Speaker, that way back in September of 
1990, the Wheat Pool argued for a recall of this Legislative Assembly.  And 



 

 

in the statement of September 19 it set out a detailed farm viability 
strategy.  I have a copy of it in front of me.  And indeed it is a very 
excellent blueprint of many of the things which farmers, as the Wheat Pool 
saw in September, need and I would argue still need in April of 1991. 
 
On that occasion the Pool said the following: 
 

 The Pool also wants Ottawa to come up with a $550-million deficiency 
payment for Saskatchewan farmers. "The payment is needed this fall and 
should be administered like other special grains programs, and not on 
production," says the Pool president. 

 
This is from the press release.  The document itself -- now I will take a 
moment just to read this -- the actual farm viability strategy says the 
following with respect to the deficiency payment: 
 

 It is estimated that Western Canadian grain producers required $1.1 
billion in deficiency payments to compensate for the low grain prices 
resulting from the U.S.-E.C. grain subsidy war. 

 
 In respect to the Iraq grain embargo, the federal government will need to 

extend additional compensation to offset any market losses. 
 

I will stop from my recitation here of the text by saying that in this 
debate of course there has been no mention of the Iraq embargo and the cost 
that it has imposed upon the farmers of this province.  Continuing again 
from the farm viability strategy paper of the Pool, it says: 
 

 Saskatchewan would receive approximately 50 per cent of the $1.1 billion 
deficiency payment, or $550 million.  This would increase Saskatchewan's 
realized net farm income to an estimated $797 million for 1990 (five-year 
average income levels). 

 
And the last point in the written script says: "Federal assistance is 
required in calendar year 1990." 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we see by this statement is the Pool's argument that 
the deficiency payment is required because of the subsidies war, because of 
the Iraq embargo.  And it's required in the calendar year 1990, and it's 
required in the amount of $550 million, and it's required, as the president 
of the Pool said, now in the fall of 1990. 
 
There is no doubt about it, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan's leading 
pre-eminent farm organization identified correctly the needs of rural 
Saskatchewan and farmers.  And since September of 1990, unconscionably and 
unforgivably and sadly, the government in Ottawa, aided and abetted by the 
silence of the front benches opposite, has ignored this call by the Wheat 
Pool and the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan.  This is an 
eight-month delay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I repeat again my point about how tragic it is that we are here on 
April 15 purporting yet to be debating a resolution which, by all newspaper 
accounts in any events, will see some action of some form by Ottawa in the 



 

 

next few days. 
 
I want to add one other point about the business of timeliness, Mr. 
Speaker.  There have been a number of statements by the government opposite 
itself on the question of timeliness.  I have here in front of me three 
statements made by a combination of either the Premier or his Associate 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Here's one comes on Progressive Conservative caucus letterhead, Mr. 
Speaker.  You'll see it.  It's dated February 16 and the headline says it 
all.  "Premier says further farm aid imminent."  That, Mr. Speaker, is two 
months ago.  Today is April 15. 
 
Then on February 18 there's a Government of Saskatchewan press release and 
the headline on it says, Mr. Speaker, "Devine, Martens host Canadian 
agriculture ministers' meeting," and in that press release again both the 
ministers who spoke this afternoon said we need to have the third line of 
defence, the deficiency payment. 
 
And then on March 2, 1991, the federal-provincial ministers of Agriculture 
met, Mr. Speaker, here in Regina with a great deal of fanfare.  Once again 
the ministers opposite issued a statement promising the payment of the 
third line of defence.  I'm going to read you two paragraphs of the 
communique p√© put out by the federal-provincial ministers. 
 

 Ministers received a report from the Third Line of Defence Committee.  
Because of the extent of the farm income shortfall in 1990 and 1991, and 
as farmers will not receive the full benefits of GRIP and NISA until 1992, 
Ministers agreed that interim measures will be required as a bridge to the 
new safety nets.  At the same time, they reinforced the need for long-term 
adjustments to be addressed through the third line of defence process. 

 
Note that word -- I'll come back to say a word about this.  They said: 
 

 At the same time, they reinforced the need for long-term adjustments to be 
addressed through the third line of defence process. 

 
And then the next paragraph talks as follows: 
 

 Ministers emphasize that the third line of defence process enters into 
play when there are problems that measures like GRIP and crop insurance 
were not designed to address . . . Any transitional assistance in 1991 
will be funded by the federal government, but will be conditional upon a 
commitment by industry and provincial governments to develop complementary 
initiatives which will enable the industry to adjust over the long-term. 

 
I'll have a word to say about that last statement which seems to tie the 
third line of defence to complementary initiatives at a provincial level, 
and seems to tie it into the question of GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
plan) or NISA (net income stabilization account). 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the point that I wish to make here, I think, is 
self-evident.  From September of 1990, through to the Premier's statement 



 

 

that it was imminent -- the payment was imminent two months ago -- through 
to the statement of the federal-provincial ministers' meeting right here in 
this city, in Regina, indicating that it was coming -- the third line of 
defence -- although there is confusion as to whether it would be tied to 
the GRIP and NISA programs. 
 
Throughout that entire period, the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan 
were entitled to believe the words of the Premier and the Minister of 
Agriculture.  They were entitled to expect that their farm leaders' hopes 
and demands, dating all the way back to September of 1990, would be 
followed.  The farmers of the province of Saskatchewan needed the amount 
and the terms and the conditions of that third line of defence spelled out, 
not to be debated in today's legislature, but to be spelled out and to be 
paid. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that is a tragedy, and it is unforgivable that this 
government opposite has been playing pure politics with the situation in a 
desperate crisis that we are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I say that this is a political situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it does not give me pleasure to say this.  Clearly this is a 
matter which should transcend partisan politics.  We know whether people 
are New Democrat farmers or Progressive Conservative farmers or Liberal 
farmers or uncommitted.  It doesn't matter.  They are facing all of the 
difficulties that the Premier outlined in his address and the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture outlined in his address. 
 
We know how desperate and how important the agricultural community is to 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  I endorse very much the 
numbers which the Premier and the minister opposite have talked about with 
respect to the impact of a healthy farm economy on the province of 
Saskatchewan, which makes this all the more puzzling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the agricultural industry is so important, as it is, if it is in such 
deep crisis, as it is -- and I won't go through all the figures that the 
Premier at length recited -- if these facts are so unalterable and so 
obvious, as they are, Mr. Speaker, the question then that begs for 
answering is: why has there not been an announcement of a third line of 
defence deficiency payment by this time?  Where in the world has the 
Premier been?  Where in the world has the Associate Minister of Agriculture 
been?  Where in the world, putting it more bluntly, has Mr. Mazankowski and 
Mr. Mulroney been? 
 
We know that this is the situation. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Tell us what your . . . (inaudible) . . . is. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- The member opposite said, what is our plan.  Our plan was, 
right from September of 1990 and consistently in press releases, to say 
that the federal-provincial government should stop playing politics and 



 

 

make the third-line payment.  That's been our position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, and we have this situation of the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster, who refuses to get involved in the debate.  Maybe 
he will a little later on, knowing this to be the case, with no explanation 
being offered.  And, Mr. Speaker, when I say no explanation being offered, 
I would suggest to you, sir, that it's incumbent upon the Prime Minister or 
Mr. Mazankowski or incumbent upon the Premier of this province to tell the 
farmers concretely what the reason for the delay is. 
 
They have a duty to say in a non-partisan, non-political way why it is that 
they've had to wait, the farmers have to wait, from September of 1990 to 
this debate of April 15th.  And one doesn't know how many days after today 
before some form of payment will be coming.  I mean, there needs to be an 
answer or an explanation. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- An accounting. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- An accounting, as one of my colleagues says.  And the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, yelling across the floor as to what our 
position is, I said to him in response, in retort, what our position has 
been. 
 
I have in front of me here, and I'm prepared to deliver it over to the 
member opposite, a statement made by myself on September 19, 1990 endorsing 
the farm viability program of the Pool, endorsing the third line of defence 
at the time that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool wanted it.  I even went so far 
as a few days ago, writing a letter to the Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, 
indicating to him, together with my colleague the Leader of the Opposition 
from Manitoba, that the third line of defence needs to be paid out now and 
urgently, and in effect being critical as to why there has been no payment.  
We have been urging them to give us a statement. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask you to reflect back, and you were very patient if I 
may say so, with respect, in listening to the comments in this debate, as 
is your responsibility.  I ask you to reflect back upon whether or not the 
Premier made any explanation at all as to why the reason for the delay in 
the payment.  And the answer is, there wasn't anything said by him at all.  
I think the record is quite clear on that. 
 
What there is, is this resolution which calls on us to support the payment 
of the third line of defence: something which we all support, something 
which the Pool initiated in September 1990, something which the official 
opposition endorsed since that time and continuously, and still no answer 
as to why the delay. 
 
I stress the reason that there is no explanation and no answer, Mr. 
Speaker, for this very reason.  In the absence of a credible, non political 
explanation as to the delay, members opposite should not be surprised if 



 

 

the farmers and the opposition and other political parties conclude that 
the delay is geared, pure and simple, to the election timetable of the 
Premier of this province and not to the interests of the farmers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- There is no other explanation; we have heard none.  And 
this I say, Mr. Speaker, is unconscionable.  It's unforgivable.  It is sad, 
and I say it's pathetic watching the two ministers today elaborate on the 
importance of agriculture -- which we all admit and support and agree -- 
all the while that farmers that want some answers and the payment on the 
third line of defence, or the deficiency payment. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that we find wrong with this 
statement, with this motion, is the fact that it does not recognize this 
political gamesmanship to which now we are reduced to debating in this 
legislature at this late hour with spring seeding around the corner.  And 
in the amendment that I propose, we propose to rectify that, to call a 
spade a spade, and to identify the reason for this delay by the amendment, 
so that the Prime Minister and the people of Saskatchewan would know. 
 
But I now move to a second point, Mr. Speaker, a second, larger point on 
this resolution.  And I invite the members opposite and I invite you, sir, 
and I invite the journalists especially, to take notice of the fact that 
the motion moved by the Premier makes no reference whatsoever to a sum of 
money to be paid by the way of the deficiency payment third line of defence 
to the farmers by the government.  There is no mention of a figure there at 
all.  Now I find this, Mr. Speaker, being very blunt about it, to be very 
worrisome.  We know that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has called for $550 
million.  I've read the portions of the Wheat Pool statement which sets out 
the rationalization for that. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, sir, and for those who will enter the 
debate following me on the opposite side, why is it that the Premier and 
the Associate Minister of Agriculture did not incorporate in this 
government motion a dollar figure, $550 million, the dollar figure which we 
all know in Saskatchewan is the minimum required in order for the farmers 
to deal with this crisis and in the face of the importance of the 
agricultural economy as the Premier and the Minister talked about this 
afternoon.  Why isn't there a figure in there? 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, this is ominous.  This is ominous because I suspect 
that the Premier of this province, working in close concert with the 
Minister of Agriculture Canada, knows that the figure will not be $550 
million.  I hope I'm wrong.  He knows that that figure cannot be supported 
by the federal government, and there is no mention of it therefore. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that if we're going to talk about this issue in a 
non-partisan way we ought not to be worried about what Mr. Mulroney thinks.  
We ought to be speaking, Conservatives and New Democrats, about what is 
needed, not what they think or what he thinks is right. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- We should not be pulling our punches here.  No one will 
fault the Premier if he goes to Ottawa and he can't get the $550 million if 
it's an honest effort, an honest try.  I worry about that because I think 
the track record of the government here has been more determined to follow 
the political agenda of the Mulroney government. 
 
But leaving that as an aside, this legislature has a duty to speak up in a 
united voice about what is required on this third line of defence.  We need 
to tell the farmers that we know they need $550 million.  We need to tell 
Mr. Mulroney and Mr. Mazankowski that, whether we're Conservatives or New 
Democrats, we're united behind that $550 million.  And, Mr. Speaker, this 
resolution is deficient because it has no figure at all contained in this 
motion. 
 
It's, in effect, a fill-in-the-blank resolution that Mr. Mulroney and Mr. 
Mazankowski can simply fill in the blanks.  And if the figure is less than 
the $550 million, then the farmers of this province will have been done a 
great disservice.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that we have to amend this 
motion to put the figure of $550 million for Saskatchewan farmers clearly 
on the record, and let's get the job done on behalf of the farmers of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So that's the second thing which is deficient on this 
motion. 
 
Now there's a third matter of this motion which I think needs to be 
addressed, again, Mr. Speaker, very bluntly.  Members opposite, the Premier 
and the Associate Minister of Agriculture, talked at length about how this 
motion, the third line of defence, tied into the GRIP and NISA programs.  
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in my travels around rural 
Saskatchewan farmers are asking me a number of questions about GRIP and 
NISA, basically stemming around the fact that they do not have the answers 
from the government opposite, or from any of the officials of the 
government, on GRIP and NISA.  They're expressing their frustration about 
this.  They're expressing their worry about the deadline, Mr. Speaker.  
They have to sign up by May 15, I think is the deadline.  The answers seem 
to vary from meeting to meeting. 
 
They're also worried about a second thing.  They want to know whether or 
not the third line of defence, which is the subject of this motion, is 
going to be tied into GRIP and NISA as they are currently structured and 
currently proposed.  And they are worried about that, because the fear, as 
has been expressed to me by farmers, is that frankly the third line of 
defence may be at least indirectly, if not directly, made conditional on 
the farmers being forced into signing into GRIP and NISA. 
 
And there have been numerous questions asked by farmers, Mr. Speaker, about 
whether or not the third line of defence is going to be tied to GRIP and 
NISA and them joining GRIP and NISA.  Did the Premier today tell the 



 

 

farmers whether or not that was going to be the case?  The answer is, not a 
word on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Did the Associate Minister of Agriculture get up and explain to the farmers 
of the province that they will have to, for example, at least indirectly 
get into GRIP and NISA, with good cause?  No, he was silent on this issue.  
And he was surely silent on the issue about whether or not the third line 
of defence was a free-standing payment in acknowledgement of what the Wheat 
Pool says is a desperate need for cash. 
 
Surely, Mr. Speaker, any objective observer of this debate would realize 
that the questions I am asking are not partisan.  These are questions that 
farmers are asking whether they are New Democrats or Conservatives or 
Liberals or uncommitted.  They have to know what they're buying into, and 
they want to know whether or not the third line of defence is being used as 
kind of a stick to beat them into a program which has many aspects of it 
that favour it, but a program which has many questions surrounding it.  My 
colleague says, let's get the facts.  And that's exactly what they're 
saying.  We need to know what the facts are. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot has been said about GRIP and NISA.  I just said a 
moment ago that it's a start.  I will say that it is a belated start.  The 
Associate Minister of Agriculture himself -- yes, the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture himself -- admitted this afternoon that in 1986-85 he described 
how the wheat prices began to tumble because of the United States export 
enhancement program.  And he will admit that in 1985, that's when the 
federal government announced that they would have an income stability 
program which would be based on some form of permanency and on the 
conditions of flexibility that the Premier outlined. 
 
And the record is clear that for over five years now Ottawa has been 
promising and the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, has been echoing 
that promise, the assurance to the farmers that there would be a permanent 
cost of production formula based on income stability -- something along 
GRIP or NISA, we didn't know at the time what it was going to be like -- 
but in any event a move away from the ad hoc programs which have 
characterized the developments in this province with respect to this issue.  
It's a start, but there's a five year delay to it.  And as I said, Mr. 
Speaker, there are many questions which are being asked out there by the 
farmers and the farm community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to your attention some of the questions and 
some of the developments out there with respect to GRIP and NISA.  And I 
want to begin, first of all, by talking a little bit about the grains and 
oilseeds safety net committee.  Now this is a committee that was referred 
to by the Premier and the Associate Minister of Agriculture in their 
remarks this afternoon.  This is the so-called 19 producers, the actual 
farmers -- not the bureaucrats and not the politicians -- the 19 farmers 
who advised the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . now the Minister of 
Finance is very sensitive because he knows exactly what I'm going to say.  
And I might say to the Minister of Finance, he deserves to be absolutely 
super-sensitive about what I'm going to read here in a moment.  So I can 
understand your super-sensitivity. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister of Finance knows 
exactly what I'm going to say, but what is interesting, Mr. Speaker, is 
that neither the Premier nor the Associate Minister of Agriculture told the 
full story on this in the speech this afternoon.  Their line was that the 
19 producers on the committee, the safety nets committee, this was their 
program.  That's the pitch. 
 
Well I have here a letter, a copy of a letter which is in the public 
domain, dated March 25, 1991, signed by Barry Senft, director, district no. 
6 of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a Pool rep, and he writes this.  Dear 
Editor: 
 

 As one of the 19 producers who sat on the grains and oilseeds safety net 
committee, I would like to clarify the . . . (role of that committee) in . 
. . . (the development of) the GRIP and NISA programs. 

 
 As a farmer and a representative for Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, I and my 

organization appreciated the opportunity to be involved in the development 
of a new grains and oilseeds safety net. 

 
Now here's the paragraph: 
 

 The committee presented its recommendations to federal and provincial 
agriculture ministers in August 1990.  Since that time, producer 
involvement has been minimal (Mr. Senft writes). 

 
 Federal and provincial governments had been responsible for final 

decisions regarding program criteria and implementation.  For example, 
important issues like cost-sharing, individual versus basket coverage and 
premium methodology were decisions made exclusively by federal and 
provincial governments. 

 
And then the letter goes on and talks about the principles for which these 
19 producers argued and fought for, but after August of 1990 were not 
listened to.  Now the chronology here is very important.  In September of 
1990 the Wheat Pool puts out its farm viability program, of which I've read 
portions to you respecting the third line of defence. 
 
In August of 1990, according to Mr. Senft, essentially, for all intents and 
purposes, this Premier and the federal government and the bureaucrats -- I 
won't say the Premier, I'll withdraw the Premier comment because he wasn't 
on the committee -- but at least the officials of the governments, 
provincially and federally, in effect stopped listening to the producers, 
the actual farmers. 
 
And the Premier did not tell the whole story today.  He attempted to tell 
the people of this province and this legislature that what we have on the 
table with respect to GRIP and NISA today is a program that the farmers' 
committee have endorsed, when Mr. Senft and others say, no, that's not the 
case.  They were there, but the decisions were made by the governments 



 

 

since August of 1990.  This, Mr. Speaker, comes from a Premier, a Minister 
of Agriculture.  And he's not alone, Mr. Senft. 
 
This will get the Minister of Finance really good and agitated.  And I 
think he should get agitated.  Here's another committee member.  Headline 
in the Leader-Post, dated April 3, 1991, "GRIP 'designer' washes hands", 
and the quotation says, "To say that the 19 producers held a majority of 
this 33-man committee, and therefore it's their program, is total hogwash." 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Terry Hanson.  Not my words.  Total 
hogwash. 
 
The Minister of Finance says why didn't he say that two months earlier?  
Because he didn't expect that the Premier and the Minister of Finance would 
go around this province and this country saying that it was their program.  
They didn't expect that they would be victimized and politicized that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That's why he didn't say it.  It's when the Minister of 
Finance and the Premier and the Associate Minister of Agriculture tried to 
politicize this operation by dragging in this safety nets committee that 
the farmers say that they object to a politicization, and the statements 
were made.  That's why it was done, Mr. Minister of Finance.  That's why it 
was done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And I say to the Minister of Finance, he can make his 
speech from a seated position.  And he keeps on saying, you know Terry 
Hanson is some sort of a political person.  He may be, but I tell you Mr. 
Minister of Finance, he's a farmer; he's a citizen of this province, and 
your arrogance in denying him his right to speak is unforgivable sir -- 
unforgivable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Their arrogance.  The Minister of Finance and the Premier, 
they say, dare you cross our words, dare you just give a different opinion 
and you're going to be maligned and you're going to be run through the mud.  
Because that's the way these people operate -- American style, personal 
attacks on people.  I say to you I'll take the words of Barry Senft and 
Terry Hanson, and the other 19 producers, long over the Minister of Finance 
or the Premier of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Shame on them.  This is a government -- shame on them -- a 
government that goes around running down people for different political 
views, on a legitimate operation and of an importance of this nature, which 
is not political and shouldn't be political, they make that in this issue. 
 



 

 

Now these are what people are saying.  Now I want to come back to the 
second point that was not mentioned in the not telling the whole story line 
of these people opposite, Mr. Speaker.  That's why they are in such deep, 
political trouble. 
 
The Premier today was talking about -- excuse me, I don't think it was the 
Premier.  It was the Associate Minister of Agriculture and his address who 
mentioned the name of Ken Rosaasen, University of Saskatchewan agricultural 
economist.  I recall that name.  And the letter here he refers to -- he 
says -- is a letter from Ken Rosaasen describing GRIP as being a program 
which is a very significant program and has a number of improvements over 
the WGSA (Western Grain Stabilization Act) and the like.  And the minister 
is dead right on that. 
 
And that's our position.  We think it's a start.  Five years too late, but 
it's at least an attempt by the governments. 
 
But what the Associate Minister of Agriculture and the Premier did not tell 
the House is what these people, Professor Rosaasen -- but there are others: 
Furtan, Rosaasen, Gray, Weisensel, Kraft and others of which they'd given 
copies to a variety of people -- what they had to say about GRIP and NISA 
in their analysis of it. 
 
And the essence of their statement -- I'm looking at page five of their 
document -- I'll read only a portion of it; it's in context.  They write as 
follows, quote: 
 

 As outlined in Section B (referring to this document they prepared), (1) 
GRIP is not market responsive.  Changes in the relative prices of crops 
will have little or no impact on the choice of crops grown by producers so 
that producers may add production to already glutted markets. 

 
Two, they write, these professors: 
 

 (2) GRIP does not encourage self-reliance, as the payout from the program 
is more important than the level of grain output achieved.  (3) GRIP does 
not recognize regional diversity.  GRIP off-loads much of the cost for the 
support for the agricultural sector to the tax payer in the regions which 
produce grain.  Given the size of the agricultural sector in these 
regions, the additional tax burden comes when these regional economies can 
least afford it.  (4) Finally (they write), GRIP is not environmentally 
sound.  As outlined in section B, the large expected payout provides an 
incentive to bring often fragile marginal land into production to collect 
program benefits and to adopt farming practices that are neither 
economically nor environmentally sound.  The exclusion of hayland and 
alfalfa may result in the rebreaking of this land to collect program 
payments. 

 
And this is a very thoughtful critique, Mr. Speaker.  One may not want to 
endorse all that's said in it.  But these are important questions which 
these people are asking.  The member opposite says, I better not.  Well, I 
mean, I would like to see the member opposite, one of them, say to the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, look, here are our answers to these 



 

 

questions raised by these eminent people.  There are explanations to them.  
I'd like them to say whether or not these are legitimate concerns, whether 
they've been properly addressed or not even addressed. 
 
But you see the point that I'm getting at, Mr. Speaker, on GRIP and NISA, 
which is part of the third line of defence.  There are a variety of 
questions as asked by Rosaasen and Furtan and by Hanson and by Senft and 
others which are out there in the community.  The farmers leave these 
meetings, Mr. Speaker, and they are as concerned about what goes on as 
anything else that they might be. 
 
Here, Mr. Speaker, I've got a newspaper story from the Leader-Post which 
makes my point.  The headline is . . . it's dated March 30, 1991.  And I'm 
going to begin, this is a story written by one D'arce McMillan of the 
Leader-Post: 
 

 Though highly promoted by the provincial government, not all farmers are 
rushing to sign up for the new farm safety net program. 

 
 Grant Swanson, a Semans-area farmer, is not sure he wants to spend about 

$20,000 for GRIP when the final payment from the program won't come until 
the fall of 1992. 

 
 And Dale Heenan, who farms southwest of Regina, is "99 per cent sure" he 

won't sign up (is the story). 
 

Now whether they do or they don't, that's not the point.  I'm simply 
identifying who these people are.  And the story continues like this: 
 

 A lot of pressure is on farmers to make a long-term commitment to the 
program, but because it is still an enigma, they must do so on faith.  And 
their faith is shaken when they attend GRIP information meetings and get 
the impression either that the people running the meetings either don't 
know the program very well, or the program itself is not fully developed, 
he said. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what we've been hearing.  We've been 
hearing by people who've attended these meetings that those running the 
meetings either don't know the program very well or the program itself is 
not fully developed.  That's exactly the concern which we are hearing, Mr. 
Speaker, when we are out talking to the farmers and in the farm community.  
And farmers need answers with respect to GRIP and NISA. 
 
Now the reason that GRIP and NISA is a part of this debate is because we 
have the prospect now that GRIP and NISA might be tied to the third line of 
defence.  Now if you've got these questions on GRIP and NISA but the third 
line of defence, which is the desperate cash needed, only comes because of 
some indirect, perhaps even direct pressure to get into GRIP and NISA, is 
this really playing fair with the farmers?  Is this the way to deal with 
this very critical situation?  Well I argue that it isn't, especially in 
the light of the constraints.  And a lot of farmers feel that they're being 
blackmailed into signing up the program or doing it in a way which is too 
hurried in order to get the cash payment, which the third line of defence 



 

 

promises to be made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the confusion.  I now move to the third area of my 
concern about this resolution.  My first area being that it doesn't explain 
satisfactorily why the delay.  My second point being that it doesn't 
indicate the numbers required.  The third point that I am speaking to, is 
the question of how it relates to GRIP and NISA.  And the confusion 
persists. 
 
Here on January 3l in the Winnipeg Free Press, Don Mazankowski is speaking 
to a Manitoba farm group and he said this: 
 

 Mazankowski also tied a second key stipulation to the proposed farm aid: 
the payment will go only to those farmers who join Ottawa's recently 
announced Gross Revenue Insurance Plan (GRIP). 

 
That's Winnipeg Free Press, January 31, 1991.  Now they've changed a bit it 
seems.  Just a few days ago in the Leader-Post the headline says, "Farm aid 
may have 'strings'".  But this time it isn't only for those who have signed 
up.  This time round the statement goes as follows: 
 

 Mazankowski replied that it "may be overstating" the case (note the words, 
Mr. Speaker) . . . it "may be overstating" the case to suggest that 
farmers will have to join the plans, but admitted there will be incentives 
associated with the money to join the safety net programs. 

 
 When the safety nets were designed, a goal was to have -- to the largest 

extent possible -- any extraordinary relief . . . tied to the new 
programs, he said. 

 
 Mazankowski said he is aiming to release details on the so-called 

third-line payments next week. 
 

Which by the way we're debating as if this was some fresh motion by the 
Premier opposite.  This is what the minister says, and then he goes on to 
talk about it. 
 
By the way, Garf Stevenson is quoted in this same story by simply saying, 
look: 
 

 . . . GRIP (is not going to) . . . provide much help this year.  "We 
really need cash." 

 
Which is the position which we advocate. 
 
So the situation is that the Minister of Agriculture Canada, Mr. 
Mazankowski, says, you can't say that they're going to be absolutely tied 
in to GRIP and NISA before you get the third line of defence payment, but 
"there will be incentives associated with the money (in order) to join the 
safety net programs." 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I say the farmers have a right to know what those 
incentives are going to be.  Are they going to be incentives or are they 



 

 

going to be strait-jackets?  Are they going to be incentives or are they 
going to be the things which bully them into signing it?  And the farmers 
want to know more particularly the details of GRIP and NISA, and I think 
those are legitimate questions to ask.  It's a start; it's a good start.  
It's five years late but these questions that the professors and others 
have raised need to be talked about and need to be aired and they're not 
being aired and the farmers feel they're being pushed into it. 
 
Let me just give you one example of what I mean.  Here's a well respected, 
well-known writer, Jim Knisley of the Leader-Post, who writes here in this 
particular article that I have in the Preeceville Progress, Preeceville, 
Saskatchewan.  I don't know if it's in the member of Saltcoats's 
constituency.  No I guess it's not; it's in Canora, the minister's 
constituency. 
 
Here, Mr. Speaker, is what the writer says: 
 

 There is also the so-called third line of defense.  The reason this 
doesn't rate being called the fifth good thing about the program is that 
nobody knows what it is.  It could be extra cash; it could be debt relief; 
it could be preferential interest rates for beginning farmers or it could 
be a chicken in every pot and two cars in every garage -- we don't know. 

 
 What we do know is that you won't qualify for the special assistance of 

the third line of defense unless you're in GRIP. 
 
 In other words, the third line of defense is a nice little piece of 

blackmail, if nothing else (Mr. Knisley writes). 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, maybe the circumstances have changed since Mr. Knisley 
wrote this on January 31, because we see now the Minister of Agriculture in 
Ottawa says that it's not going to be a straight, direct tie-in, but 
there'll be incentives.  But none the less, this captures the mood of what 
farmers are telling us. 
 
And I say to the Associate Minister of Agriculture, for whom I have quite a 
fair amount of respect, I would have expected him to have gotten up this 
afternoon in the legislature and have told us the full story about whether 
or not the ministers are talking about the third line of defence in the 
context of either: (a) extra cash, free-standing; or (b) debt relief; or 
(c) some preferential financing by way of interest rates; or some 
combination of those three, or some other option. 
 
Because I believe, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the ministers of Agriculture 
of Canada have been talking about the third line of defence in each one of 
those three or four alternatives, to which the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan have every right to know, and to have that in advance, to have 
it debated and thought out, not simply something foisted on them in their 
desperate moment on the eve of an election, at the time of crisis that the 
Premier talks about, in a time of economic importance that the Premier 
talks about.  They have a right to know.  You can't manipulate them the way 
these people opposite have been manipulating them. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So, Mr. Speaker, this resolution does not tell us about 
this.  And we feel that because the time to sign up GRIP and NISA is too 
short, May 15; because the questions asked by a number of people, respected 
people like the professors I've talked about and farmers, need to be 
answered; because the third line of defence has three or four various 
options as to how the money could be spent, at least that's at one point 
what the ministers were considering -- I firmly believe that to be the 
case.  The associate minister can deny me if I'm wrong.  I'd like him to 
table the documents, however, to prove that. 
 
Because these questions are up in the air, we say the third line of defence 
should be made as a free-standing payment.  In the words of Garf Stevenson 
of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, we need the cash, the farmers need the 
cash, full stop, period.  And it should be in the amount of $550 million 
and this resolution doesn't talk about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, and move the 
amendment of which I talked about, let me just say in passing that we know 
what the situation is with respect to Manitoba.  Manitoba has not signed on 
with respect to NISA.  We know that Alberta has serious questions 
respecting NISA for as much as we can tell, perhaps even GRIP as well. 
 
Saskatchewan has joined in fast and is pushing hard, fast.  In a way this 
is very consistent of what Saskatchewan has done in the past.  When Ottawa 
did away with interest-free cash advances we didn't say, boo.  When we 
sought to reinstate it, finally the government opposite was forced to say 
something about it on the eleventh hour, when they were reinstated.  The 
farm fuel rebate, when that was done away with, Saskatchewan didn't say, 
boo.  When the green paper is put down, Saskatchewan doesn't say, boo, in 
effect going to the market economy. 
 
And in a way it seems as if these questions are almost the same way, but 
the bottom line of it is, Mr. Speaker, that the farming community is 
entitled to have the answers, and we are obligated to provide them the 
answers; not we in opposition -- we cannot provide them for obvious 
reasons, but the government is obligated to tell them the whole story.  And 
we as legislators, Mr. Speaker, are obligated to fight for what our 
community wants.  And we should not be doing it at 11th hours, resolutions 
such as this.  We should be trying to do it in a non-partisan way.  I'm 
sorry we weren't consulted by the Premier with respect to his proposed 
resolution.  We might have been in formal discussions, given him some of 
our ideas so that we could have come up with a joint resolution and an 
unanimous motion. 
 
These are serious issues, which this motion does not accurately set out or 
speak to.  And I think -- as I said, as I'm going to close now, as I said 
at the beginning -- this is unforgivable.  It's unconscionable.  And in a 



 

 

way, it's sad and pathetic that a government in its fifth and last dying 
years is so incapable and unwilling to come clean, and to play the way this 
game should not be played.  It should be played fairly and honestly with 
the farming community in a period of crisis. 
 
We think accordingly the amendment, which I am now going to move, more 
accurately reflects what the farmers want and more accurately reflects the 
situation today.  And so I'm going to move, seconded by my colleague, the 
agricultural critic, who will say a few words after I do as the seconder of 
this amendment, the following amendment to this motion: 
 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 urges the federal and provincial governments to end the delay of the 

payment of the third line of defence assistance for political reasons; 
urges the federal government to make immediately the third line of defence 
payment of at least $550 million to Saskatchewan farmers; urges that 
eligibility for this payment not be tied to enrolment in GRIP; and orders 
that this resolution be sent by telex . . . 

 
I'll stop there, Mr. Speaker, to say after we pass a resolution, what do we 
do with it.  That's another failing of the Premier's motion.  It's just a 
passed motion.  We'd like to do something with it, and therefore I 
continue: 
 

 and orders that this resolution be sent by telex to the Prime Minister 
immediately upon its adoption by the Assembly to communicate the urgency 
of the situation. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the 
amendment put forward by the Leader of the Opposition, and to make a few 
points on the amendment and on some of the comments by the minister and the 
associate minister opposite earlier today. 
 
I would just first of all note that in the motion put forward by the 
government concerning the third line of defence, with the Premier and the 
associate minister speaking on this issue, for the most part they talked 
about the GRIP and NISA program and only very briefly spoke about the issue 
the motion was putting forward, and that is the third line of defence. 
 
I'm not sure what that means but I think it might mean that the Premier and 
government opposite are trying to hang their hat, to hang their election 
hat that is, on the GRIP and NISA programs.  Unfortunately from talking to 
many people out in the country I'm not so sure that that's going to work 
for them. 
 
I want to start by saying that this government opposite is not fooling 
anyone.  The hypocrisy put forward by the timing of this motion when last 



 

 

Friday, the day that this motion was put forward, is precisely the day that 
in Ottawa, Mr. Mazankowski, the federal Minister of Agriculture, was making 
a statement to the press saying that he was going to make an announcement 
on the third line of defence this week. 
 
So I hope the government opposite doesn't think they're fooling anyone when 
it comes to the timing of the motion, the timing, the debate, because we've 
seen this so many times before.  We saw in 1988 when the deficiency 
payments were coming through, the eight- to nine-month delay in the process 
where the government would make announcement after announcement after 
announcement, calling for a deficiency payment, going through the political 
process so they could have yet another press release.  Well they can do 
that once in a while, Mr. Speaker, but I'll tell you, farmers in 
Saskatchewan are sick and tired -- sick and tired -- of being pawns in a 
process, a political process, a political agenda put forward by a 
government in the dying days of its mandate, the dying days of its mandate 
when they know they have but one constituency, and that constituency, they 
think, is rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, living and working and spending all my time 
in rural Saskatchewan, I can tell them something different.  The hypocrisy 
they put forward by trying to go through this charade of political 
announcements and rhetoric is not working in rural Saskatchewan.  It's not 
working because of the fact that farmers can see through this little 
charade.  They can see through it and they call it blackmail.  They're 
saying, well the government says we'd better vote for them because we're 
going to get a third line of defence and we're going to get a GRIP and NISA 
program, and especially the third line of defence.  The blackmail is that 
the third line of defence, it is said, will be hooked to the GRIP or NISA 
programs, and farmers don't like that. 
 
They're saying, why do I have to be hooked into a program that I don't 
know.  It's supposed to be a voluntary program.  This is one of the bases, 
one of the bases of this program, it was voluntary.  But all of a sudden, 
as this little charade unfolds, we are finding that there are strings 
attached.  And one of those strings could possibly be, as indicated by the 
federal minister and some ministers opposite, that there will be a 
requirement to join the GRIP program and get your third line of defence. 
 
Well farmers don't like that, Mr. Speaker.  They don't like it for more 
than one reason.  First of all, what is the program?  What is the GRIP 
program?  We have seen meeting after meeting after meeting, and I get 
amused by the numbers that the government opposite put forward.  They're 
saying they've seen thousands and tens of thousands of farmers.  I've been 
to some of those meetings.  Those same farmers are now going to their crop 
insurance agents to sign up or to discuss the GRIP program, the GRIP 
program that . . . the big question is:  will it be a requirement to sign 
the GRIP program before you get your third line of defence, before you get 
your deficiency payment? 
 
But they're being asked to sign this program on the back of the sheet, or 
the form.  They're saying that . . . They sign on the bottom line saying 
that they understand the program.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I defy anyone to tell 



 

 

me what exactly the program is because . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Sit down and I will. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well the minister opposite says, sit down and he will.  
Well I've been at a meeting where he has given one version of the GRIP 
program.  I've been at a meeting where the associate minister has given 
another version of the GRIP program.  And that is the problem with this 
government.  They have a terrible lack of commitment when it comes to 
telling the truth about programs, or maybe they don't know.  Maybe they 
don't know and they're just saying that they know. 
 
At the end of the GRIP program, end of the first year of the GRIP program, 
there is a review process that has been stated in the legislation.  So just 
look at it this way.  Right now before this crop year, this spring, farmers 
are being asked to sign into the program.  They're being asked to sign a 
document saying they understand the program.  But the program, at the end 
of the first year, is going to be changed without a doubt.  It has to be 
changed if it's going to be a good program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So farmers are being asked to sign a blank cheque.  They're being asked to 
sign a document saying they understand something when the information is 
not available.  And again I come back to the meetings in the country.  From 
one meeting to the other meeting to the other meeting there has been a 
difference of opinion from minister to minister or from bureaucrat to 
bureaucrat exactly what the program is.  Farmers simply cannot sign a 
document . . . feeling good about signing a document that they don't know 
what it's all about, but they have to do that. 
 
Why not, Mr. Speaker -- and I ask the government opposite -- why not give 
the farmers a year's grace?  Why not say we have a new program here and 
that the principles of the program as originally set out by those people 
who put forward ideas from the farm groups . . . both people put forward 
ideas that were legitimate.  The principle of long term, the principle of 
predictability, the principle of farmers participating in a program that 
will benefit themselves, those are all good principles.  But from what 
we've seen, those principles have not been put forward in time for farmers 
to make a rational decision. 
 
So why not give them a year's grace.  Why not say this is a program.  The 
first year of the program is a free year.  First of all farmers know they 
need the money.  The government knows they need the money.  And if I could 
just have the indulgence of the minister from . . . or the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, I'd finish explaining this to him. 
 
Let farmers have one free year, figure out if the program is good or bad, 
make the necessary adjustments to that program at the end of the first 
year, and then sign them in to a long-term commitment.  By that time they 
know if the program is good or is bad, and they can make a rational 
decision.  We've seen the months pass before the announcement of the 
program.  We have seen the programs coming into place that have so many 
questions to be asked that the answers are still not coming forth. 
 



 

 

And I had to laugh when the associate minister was saying that we went to 
the farmers, and we gave them some options, and we told them that this 
program was in their best interests, and they asked us many questions.  
Well you know why they asked many questions, Mr. Speaker.  They asked many 
questions because the whole intent of the process to travel around 
Saskatchewan and have big meetings with farmers was because the government 
was trying to block the loopholes farmers might be looking at in order to 
take advantage of this program, because they knew on the surface, at first 
blush, that it was not a program that they were going to be satisfied with.  
And the government knew that when the farmers aren't satisfied with a 
program, what option do they have but to take advantage of a program.  And 
so they went out to the public and asked all the questions.  All the 
questions came back. 
 
And you know what the result was, Mr. Speaker?  And this is why, as my 
leader has indicated, there has been a backing away by farm groups from 
this program.  Farm groups were in the process up until last October.  
Government went out to a series of meetings.  The farmers asked a series of 
questions.  The result is 80 to 100 changes in the GRIP program from the 
time the farm groups put forward the proposal to today.  And they want 
farmers to sign, saying they know what the program stands for.  There's an 
indication that the signing the program will mean that they're going to be 
involved in the third line of defence.  Well what blackmail, if I've ever 
seen blackmail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that's why farmers in rural Saskatchewan today are not very happy with 
this government.  They're not very happy with this government, and that's 
why this government isn't very happy because they know that they've bought 
them in the past by promises.  The farmers know those promises haven't come 
through, and this government knows that they're not going to be able to do 
it again, because they just simply cannot go forth and have these 
falsehoods buy elections.  So, Mr. Speaker, I say that this program, the 
third line of defence program, the GRIP program which are tied together. 
has very, very serious credibility problem. 
 
(2000) 
 
But the government says, well, there's going to be some sweeteners 
involved.  I've heard talk of possibly cash advance on the interim payment 
for the GRIP program.  I hear talk of postponing payments for premium, all 
these types of things just to entice people into coming forward and taking 
the program.  But the result of that is, if there is an interim payment or 
interest-free cash advance on the interim payment, it still doesn't mean 
any new money, and this is what farmers are saying.  This is what the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has been pushing for.  We need an immediate cash 
payment to producers to get the crop in. 
 
This has always been pointed out as a deficiency in this whole process.  
It's been pointed out by every farm group.  The GRIP premiums and payments 
are going to come due in this fall, the interim payments.  But what about 
this spring?  There is no money.  I drive around farm to farm in my 
constituency and other areas of the province talking to farmers, asking 
them about their opinions of the program, and there simply is no money out 



 

 

there. 
 
So why the charade?  Why the antics about trying to convince people that 
there's going to be a third line of defence and hooking it to the GRIP 
payment?  Why all the sweeteners, the strings?  Why not, Mr. Speaker, tell 
the farmers the truth?  And if they were to tell them the truth, that would 
be the best political move they could make.  But the reason they don't tell 
them the truth, Mr. Speaker, is because there is no truth in these 
programs.  They're short-term programs.  They're manipulative programs.  
They're programs very similar to those programs that we've had from this 
government in the past.  It's a program to try to get them by another 
election.  Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it's not going to work.  It simply 
is not going to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, if this government is so sure in their own 
minds that they have the answer to the agricultural problems -- they put 
forward with great fanfare these programs, the third line of defence, the 
GRIP and NISA programs -- if they're so sure this is going to work, then 
why don't they stand in their places and tell farmers that they're going to 
stop all the foreclosure actions until they put these programs into place?  
Short-term program by this fall will see the results of the program 
starting to come in. 
 
They say we're going to have a third line of defence, cash in the spring.  
They say there's going to be the payment for the GRIP program in the fall.  
But if they're so sure it's going to work, why don't they give the farmers 
a break?  Why don't they say, we will stop, put a halt on your foreclosure 
actions in order so that you can get your house in order, in order that you 
can take advantage of these programs.  And then after that we will look at 
the whole situation again and see what has to be done. 
 
But they're not confident in the programs.  They're not confident in the 
programs because the programs simply are not going to work and they know 
they're not going to work.  It's short term; it's ad hoc.  Just as we said 
the very first time this program was put forward, the GRIP program, it's 
the shortest long-term program in the history of this province. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, why haven't there been any projections?  If it's 
not going to be a short-term program, why hasn't the government come 
forward with a four- or five-year scenario on different crops, on different 
amounts of production, and on different prices? 
 
Has anyone seen the scenarios on crops production and prices put forward by 
the government saying, if we have these amount of bushels and this price on 
this crop, then the result will be (a); but if the price is lower and the 
productions lower or higher or whatever, it will be scenario (b).  This has 
not been put forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it hasn't been put forward because they know that if they were to lay 
it out in black and white the farmers of this province would see -- not 
that they haven't already seen because they're ingenuitive enough that 



 

 

they've already figured this process out -- they would see that in year 
three, four, and five the income from this GRIP program starts to decline 
very rapidly, assuming, as projected, the price stays very low, because 
we're moving off the mid-1970 averages for price, moving into very low 
average prices for the next few years.  And at the same time, as my 
colleague says, the farmers are being asked to commit themselves.  So 
they're only giving out a little bit of information.  They're not giving 
all the facts because they know in their own minds that this is a 
short-term solution. 
 
I mean, we've had ag economics professors.  We've had farm organizations 
and farmers themselves figuring this thing out. And everyone . . . if 
there's one thing that they're unanimous on it is that if, as projected, 
the price of wheat stays down for the next two or three years, that there 
will be no pay-out by year four or five of this program or not even enough 
to cover your premium.  That's why they're not putting out predictions.  
And that's the same thing with the third line of defence. 
 
Why didn't they articulate as this amendment we said puts forward?  Why do 
they not say $550 million, as is a common number put forward by the 
agriculture groups around this province?  Why do they not say that it 
wasn't going to be tied to GRIP?  Why do they not say we're going to have 
one year of a free program, so you don't have to sign your life away for 
the next four years?  They didn't do that because they know, and their 
advisors have known and have advised them that it's a short-term program. 
 
The farm groups were very, very serious about their commitment to this 
program.  And this is the part that really bugs me.  We went through this 
exercise at the Wheat Pool, the farmers union, the wheat growers, the 
canola growers and the 19 representatives that were on the program were 
very serious about developing a program, a long-term program that was in 
fact going to help producers. 
 
And now since last October, six or seven months later, we've seen all the 
changes.  They were abandoned by this government in Saskatchewan and the 
federal government in Ottawa for one reason.  The producers had the 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, but this government and the Mulroney government in 
Ottawa has one commitment and that is unto themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, in all the talk and all the rhetoric we've 
heard from the other side of the House, in here and the government in 
Ottawa, there is one thing missing.  The item that has been missing from 
every debate that we have ever entered into in this House or every 
discussion that we've entered into with the Government of Canada regarding 
agriculture, and that is there is not one mention of debt restructuring. 
 
And I'll tell you, if there's one message that I get clear from the farmers 
of Saskatchewan, that is for every dollar of income that I bring in, I have 
to be able to balance that dollar with the amount of debt dollars that I 
have to put out.  And it's not mentioned again.  If there was a commitment 
to creating a solution for this problem this government and the federal 



 

 

government would be talking about a debt restructuring program in concert 
with an income stability program.  And again, it's not mentioned. 
 
We have had Bills in this House over the last four years, year after year 
after year.  I've gone through them all.  This government talk about farm 
financial stability, and we have another amendment to that effect this 
year.  But for four years we've talked about farm financial stability.  
They've stood in their places and they've talked about the security of the 
future, the long-term debt restructuring, the stability of agriculture as 
far as debt was concerned.  And what's happened?  Absolutely nothing, 
absolutely nothing.  It's all rhetoric because there's no commitment. 
 
The number of farm foreclosures keeps sky-rocketing, the government 
opposite being the biggest forecloser.  The number of people in 
Saskatchewan walking away with voluntary transfers.  The number of people 
just simply saying, I can no longer stand it any more and leaving the 
province.  I mean I live in rural Saskatchewan and many of these people do 
too, and if they had a commitment they would be very serious about trying 
to keep the numbers on the farm.  But that commitment simply isn't there. 
 
I just wonder, Mr. Speaker, how they can face their neighbours, the rural 
MLA's over there, how they can face their neighbours and tell them that 
they're trying to do something when they've seen absolutely nothing as far 
as debt restructuring is concerned from their government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister has talked about the income, how it had been 
cut in half in one year, and cut in half again in another year, and cut in 
half again the third year.  And now we're at a negative 181, I think, 
million dollar income, he said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister had a choice in some of these matters.  He 
just likes to sit there and say, well this is the way of the world; we're 
in little Saskatchewan here and we can't do anything about this.  Mind you, 
this is the same minister that says he's controlling the purse strings in 
Ottawa, getting the payments out here. 
 
And he stood idly by, in fact sometimes not so idly by, in removing a 
number of programs that benefitted Saskatchewan farmers financially, 
programs that we have had in years gone by, up until a year or two ago, 
that made sure that the farm income remained as high as it could be.  I've 
talked about these programs before, the two-price wheat. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture, the Premier of this province, was a 
cheer-leader taking away $127 million from the province of Saskatchewan, 
because the Free Trade Agreement made sure that the two-price wheat system 
in this province, in this country, was gone.  And he pushed that. 
 
And he was the minister that said nothing when the transportation rates 
have increased for the last three years going.  And we know why he's doing 
that, because there's going to be a whole new regime, he thinks, in the 
freight rate system. 
 
And there was interest rates, interest rates that when the government 



 

 

should have been doing something about them, were ever sky-rocketing.  In 
fact, it went up seven times in seven months till April of 1990.  And what 
do they do?  Absolutely nothing.  And this is dollars out of the pockets of 
Saskatchewan farmers.  The fuel, the fuel rebates.  He stood idly by when 
they took the fuel rebates away. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my point is this -- the list go on and on -- but my point 
is this, the Premier stood in his place today, as the associate minister 
did, and he was trying to tell Saskatchewan farmers of the billions of 
dollars that he and his government has brought forward from Ottawa.  Well 
I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, those dollars are dollars that he allowed to be 
taken away, in fact helped take away from Saskatchewan farmers in the first 
place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- What hypocrisy.  What hypocrisy from a minister, from a 
Premier of a province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they're only giving back what they took away.  I will repeat 
that time and time again, giving back what they've taken away.  If their 
programs were so lucrative, and they had not taken away the millions of 
dollars from farmers, then the amount of money that was put forward, I 
think the Premier used the figure $10 billion, certainly would have been 
enough to correct the situation.  Certainly would have been enough to 
correct the situation, but it wasn't.  It wasn't because they just simply 
took out of one pocket, passed it through the hands of government, and put 
it into the other pocket.  And farmers were left spinning their wheels, 
digging that hole ever deeper into a state of foreclosure for many and 
leaving the farm for others. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I've talked a bit about the government trying to hook 
farm groups into this whole safety net program, the third line of defence.  
I talked about the confusion at the GRIP meetings; put forward the 
different messages from different meetings.  I've talked about the fact 
that the Saskatchewan farmers have had money taken out of their pockets and 
the government telling them that they were being good guys by putting it 
back into their pockets. 
 
But the point of the whole thing is, Mr. Speaker, we again see a 
short-term, ad hoc approach to agriculture, and this is the sad part of it 
all.  The short-term, ad hoc approach to agriculture is putting forward 
many, many bankruptcies -- and if the Minister of Finance would take his 
place and quit interrupting, I'll just tell him -- putting forward many 
people in bankruptcy situations, putting forward many foreclosures, forcing 
farm families off the land, reducing the number of people in rural 
communities, reducing the number of people in our towns and villages, and 
in fact reducing the number of people in this province of Saskatchewan.  
This is the government that is saying that they are going to replenish.  
They're going to be the saviours of the Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
(2015) 
 



 

 

Programs with no predictability.  We've got no predictability on the GRIP 
program.  We've had no predictability on the ad hoc programs before that, 
and we have no predictability on the third line of defence. 
 
We are sitting here in mid-April of 1991.  This need for a third line of 
defence was identified months, months ago.  And why don't we have it?  What 
is the reason for not having a program in place right now when farmers are 
starting to seed and work their land in the south-west part of this 
province?. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Could you make that question multiple choice or true and 
false? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- If the Minister of Finance would again listen to the 
comments . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Speed things up a lot. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- The Minister of Finance is chirping from his seat because 
he knows, he knows that eight months have gone by, at least eight months, 
from the time that farm groups are putting forward a scenario that said 
there had to be a cash payment in farmers' pockets this spring, because the 
GRIP program was not going to come into effect until the fall.  And he sits 
there chirping from his seat, making a joke of this when farm families are 
going broke. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, one of the big problems of this whole scenario 
is whether or not the third line of defence is going to be hooked into the 
GRIP program, whether or not there's going to be any benefit from this 
program at all. 
 
The point remains that it's the only game in town.  They've seen fit to 
make it the only game in town.  They've taken away western grain 
stabilization.  They've taken away cash advances.  There's no more 
two-price wheat.  All the predictable, long-term programs of freight rates 
and fuel rebates and the like are gone.  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Oats and the wheat board.  Don't forget that one. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Yes, if the minister would come to order, I'll continue.  
Mr. Speaker, all these predictable programs are gone and there's no 
predictability, and this is the only game in town. 
 
So I think, myself as a farmer, I have no choice.  I have no choice but to 
go into this program.  Not that I like it, not that it's going to be a 
saviour, but that people opposite have put farmers in the position where 
they have no choice.  They've taken everything else away and said here's a 
program.  You sign up for this whether you like it or not, because if you 
don't sign up for it, you know you're going to be out on your ear, and if 
you do sign up for it, they know they got you right here.  Any changes can 
be made without the farmers' permission -- good or bad -- and they're 



 

 

locked into it for four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that any way to run government, to run programs, to run 
policies that are supposed to be here to keep the people of Saskatchewan 
viable, to keep the people of Saskatchewan operating and functioning in a 
world that is very competitive, in a world that is seeing subsidies put 
forward in a very forthright manner by the national treasuries of every 
other country around the world?  I don't think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I just wanted to, Mr. Speaker, end up by saying that I was truly 
appalled, like I . . . There's a lot of times that I listen to the Premier 
of this province speak that I think that he doesn't know what farmers are 
talking about, that he is so far out of touch. 
 
And then there's times where I think well, he must know, he's the Minister 
of Agriculture.  He has how many members in rural Saskatchewan he's always 
talking about.  But I listened to the Premier today.  I've listened to him 
on other occasions and some of the things that he was saying I found very 
incredible. 
 
He was saying well, you know, you got a program where it's going to put so 
many millions of dollars in your pocket-book.  You know that in the 
beginning of the year you're going to sign up; at the end of the year 
you're going to get so many dollars.  And if you want, you can hold your 
production or you can sell it the next year or you can feed it to your 
cattle or whatever.  Well, Mr. Speaker, how unreal, in a province where 
two-thirds of the people in the industry of farming are being forced to 
live almost from day to day.  And that's another aspect, just as a side bar 
of this GRIP program. 
 
If I'm a farmer who can afford to hold onto my grain and sell it for higher 
than the average price, well I'd get the benefit.  But if I'm a guy who's 
got the banker knocking on my door and I got to sell it right out of the 
combine in order to stop the . . . keep the wolf from the door and keep the 
banker from foreclosing on me, and I may have to sell it below the average 
price, then I'm going to lose that dollar.  But that's a whole other 
argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this minister who stands up today talking about an unreal world in 
Saskatchewan agriculture, he's talking from his perspective, Mr. Speaker, 
from the perspective of a Premier of a province making a very tidy sum and 
won't get into the fact about some of his land dealings right now.  But 
from the Premier of the province who doesn't have to worry about where his 
next dollar's coming from . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker, they're pretty sensitive about that one and that's a discussion 
for another day. 
 
But I'll tell you, for a Premier of this province who doesn't have to worry 
about where his next dollar is from, and I hear him talking about holding 
your grain over to sell it next year when the price is higher, well give me 
a break, Mr. Speaker.  I mean there is thousands of farmers out there who 
simply do not have a choice of when they're going to sell their grain. 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They have a choice. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- And that is right, as my colleague said, but these people 
do have a choice.  They had a choice of creating with the federal 
government a program that was going to be predictable, a program that was 
going to be long term, a program that was going to provide some debt 
restructuring, and a program that was going to give farmers of this 
province a light at the end of the tunnel.  And they chose not to do that.  
They chose not to do that because they thought, they thought that this GRIP 
program and the third line of defence, and the western grain stabilization 
payout that they knew was coming this spring, was going to be enough to 
tide them over to another election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think they are sorely mistaken because I've travelled 
farm to farm for many, many, many hours, and days and months of this last 
winter.  And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I haven't heard one person -- I do 
not exaggerate -- I haven't heard one person say that this GRIP program, 
this third line of defence program, is going to be the saviour for their 
operation. 
 
But what they are saying, is what choice do I have?  They've put me in a 
position where they've taken away all my options.  I can't get it from the 
market-place.  I can't get it from programs I used to rely on.  I can't get 
it from a government that is supposedly providing me with some stability.  
And I can't get it because one reason. This government and the federal 
government of this country has no, absolutely no commitment, no long-term 
commitment, and I say no short 
_term commitment to anybody but themselves, to tide them over another 
election, to make sure that they're going to feed their own pockets and the 
pockets of their friends for another four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I predict that that won't happen.  It won't happen because 
they can't be trusted; they're not being trusted, and if they knew, if they 
knew what the results could be with farmers when they get angry, I don't 
think they would have acted in this manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly will be supporting this amendment -- this 
amendment that is urging the government to bring forward policies that are 
clearer and it's something that people can grasp on. 
 
Get rid of the politics of delaying this payment.  We've seen that in the 
past; we've experienced the political gamesmanship; we've seen the results.  
So get rid of the politics.  Bring on $550 million that is asked for, that 
is needed in this province in order to get farmers a bridge to the fall.  
Bring forward a GRIP program that is not going to tie their hands to a 
third line of defence.  Give them some of their liberties back. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I support sending a telex to the Premier as soon as this 
thing is passed . . . to the Prime Minister, rather, as soon as this is 
passed just to encourage him to try to drop his political agenda and to do 
something good for a change for the province of Saskatchewan.  Thank you 
very much. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 
join in this debate and make some remarks about the comments from the 
member from Humboldt as well as the comments from the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
I really think that the member from Humboldt was stretching the credibility 
of people in this Assembly.  He was really really trying to get people to 
question the integrity of members of this Assembly, and he even stooped so 
low as to start dragging in things such as land deals and everything else.  
But we can't expect anything more from the opposition. 
 
Tonight we've heard a new one.  It used to be too little, too late, or me 
too, and a little bit more.  Now it's you didn't do it right and you should 
have done it better.  But you know the one thing that we haven't heard from 
the opposition, either on GRIP or NISA or third line of defence or 
agriculture in general, is what their policy is.  What's their policy?  The 
silent majority. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think I may have some idea what their policy is going 
to be because the Leader of the Opposition stood up and he said we should 
send a telex, a telex off to the Prime Minister.  Well as I recall, it kind 
of dates the member opposite because telex were around in the '60s.  I 
understand today I send facsimiles, fax copies. I've got lots of fax 
numbers; I don't have any telex numbers.  Now there's one thing about the 
Leader of the Opposition is that he's consistent.  Yes sir.  The man for 
the '60s.  Once again we see it.  The next thing you know he's going to be 
calling for a LIFT (lower inventories for tomorrow) program, like his 
liberal buddies put in.  I mean that's their idea of policy. 
 
Well let's take a look at another policy that they may be coming down with.  
Let's take a look at what we've got.  Well they called for a moratorium.  
I've heard that.  We've got to have a moratorium.  And when you say, well 
what about the credit unions?  I mean if you have a moratorium it's really 
going to hurt local depositors.  Oh, we're going to exclude the credit 
unions.  Well how are we going to do that?  Well we're going to privatize 
the finance system and let the credit unions handle it.  I mean that's one 
thought.  So how are you going to exempt the credit unions from the 
moratorium anyhow?  Most interesting. 
 
The other thing the member for Humboldt neglected to do was his homework.  
Twenty-one thousand Saskatchewan farmers have signed up for the GRIP 
program . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And just let me repeat that 
for the member from Moose Jaw who is continuously chirping from his seat -- 
21,000 farmers have signed up for the GRIP program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Now 21,000 farmers walked into their crop insurance 
agent's office and sat down and thoroughly discussed the program that 
exists.  I know because I walked into my crop insurance agent and sat down 
and thoroughly discussed my farm situation -- the options that I had, what 



 

 

the program would provide for us. 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member will have his opportunity to speak next, if 
he so desires, and other hon. members as well.  So the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena is giving an edifying speech which I'm sure we all want 
to hear.  So let us allow him to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll try to be as 
edifying as possible.  Well the member from Moose Jaw, who chirps from his 
seat, says you know this is no good, you know you don't have the good 
policies, you haven't done it right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we announced a program -- the outlines of a program -- and 
then we took it to the farmers, the producers, the people who are going to 
be affected by it.  Now had we not done that the opposition would criticize 
us for not doing that.  So we did it.  And they criticize us for taking it 
out to tell farmers about the program and to ask them for their input.  And 
the member from Moose Jaw should pay attention.  He might learn something. 
 
The farmers were part of the development of this program.  The broad 
framework was put together by the 19 producers, the producer groups, in 
concert with the provincial and federal governments.  That was taken out to 
the farmers, and we said here it is.  What do you think?  Can it be made 
better?  This is why it's being done.  This is the concepts behind it.  
This is what we're trying to accomplish.  Can you make it better? 
 
(2030) 
 
And it has been made better, Mr. Speaker.  As we've travelled along, 
farmers have had a number of comments that they made about the programs.  A 
number of changes have been made as we went along.  Now those changes, Mr. 
Speaker, are not sudden changes in policy from one meeting to the next as 
the member from Humboldt would have you believe, but were rather decisions 
that occurred as the process developed.  And I was at about 25 meetings 
myself, and at each meeting that succeeded the previous one I would add any 
changes that had been made to the program.  I would update the farmers 
completely, and go through the process as to why and how come. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can't help it that the member from Humboldt has got 
selective amnesia and only hears what he wants to hear and only sees what 
he wants to see.  And I can't help it that the Leader of the Opposition, 
who has to put on a good show about knowing something about agriculture in 
this legislature, stood up for an hour and a half or two and berated this 
government and this program -- left, right, and centre.  Mr. Speaker, the 
member who is the Leader of the Opposition does not know a whole lot about 
agriculture in case you hadn't guessed already.  He doesn't. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- His idea of walking out and meeting farmers is to 
say, hello rural person, nice dog -- those kinds of things.  Now that may 
be satirizing the Leader of the Opposition unfairly, but, Mr. Speaker, his 
knowledge of agriculture compared to that of the Premier and the Associate 



 

 

Minister of Agriculture and members on this side is minuscule. 
 
And besides, what would you expect the opposition to say about this 
program?  What would you expect them to say?  Would you expect them to 
stand up and laud the efforts of this government?  I doubt it; I really 
doubt it.  They haven't had one positive thing to say in nine years.  They 
would rather put politics before policy, and that's all they do.  They 
criticize our policy and have none of their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GRIP program may not be perfect.  I agree, it may not be 
perfect. But, Mr. Speaker, as I've said at all the meetings I was at, 
compare what you had -- crop insurance, beef stabilization, grain 
stabilization -- and then compare it to the level of support, the level of  
 Dinsurance you have under the GRIP and NISA programs and it's quite a bit 
better. 
 
Now it may be we can make it perfect down the road -- the costs will go up 
-- but right now the program is better than what we've had. I admit that. 
Let's work at making it better. Members opposite say it's got to be perfect 
right out of the chute. It's got to be just perfect. 
 
Now the member for Regina North West toured around on an open-the-books 
tour, and he was talking about the GRIP program. And he said, well the GRIP 
and NISA will cost the provincial governments $700 million in the first 
year. That's money that's got to be borrowed. The program does not even 
meet the needs of farmers. Well I guess he doesn't like $700 million for 
farmers or 1.3 billion for farmers. 
 
When you look at the cost to the provincial government, it's about $126 
million comes out of the provincial coffers to pay for the provincial share 
of the GRIP program. Now, Mr. Speaker, that's a far cry from 700.  When you 
look at the returns coming into the hands of producers that will benefit 
this province to the tune of $1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker, it's phenomenal. 
 
If you want to put something in another perspective, if you would, Mr. 
Speaker, members opposite have said that $11 billion is chicken-feed. It's 
nothing, a bunch of empty promises -- promises, promises, promises. What's 
10 billion here or there? The member from Humboldt said, oh 10 billion, it 
was only what you took away. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't quite believe that.  And I think the member 
opposite was just stretching things a little bit.  Farmers across 
Saskatchewan aren't going to believe that, Mr. Speaker.  But members 
opposite have to dump on this program.  They have to berate us for trying 
to bring in policy because they don't have any of their own -- they don't 
have any of their own. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite also know that you can't just sell your 
grain off the combine as the member from Humboldt would have us believe.  
We have a quota system in this country.  You can't just unload your grain 
suddenly off the combine.  You know that; you're a farmer.  You know that.  
So why does the member opposite have us believe that we're forced to sell 
all our grain right off the combine?  Why would he say that?  He knows 



 

 

better -- grandstanding at its worst. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that I could go on for quite some time on this topic.  
But I tell you what, I think there are a lot of members on both sides of 
the House may have something to say about it.  I know there are members on 
this side of the House that do.  So, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 52 -- An Act to provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into 
Constituencies for the Election of members of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With me is Mr. Doug Moen, 
co-ordinator of legislative services; Tom Irvine, Crown solicitor, 
constitutional law branch; and Darcy McGovern, Crown solicitor, legislative 
services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I spoke at some length 
on Friday regarding this Bill, but I'd like to just make a few summary 
comments, and I have a couple of colleagues who wanted to make a few 
comments as well, and then I have a few questions that I want to ask the 
minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Brief summary, right. 
 
I spoke on Friday last about the undemocratic nature of the existing 
legislation, as well as some of the erosions of democratic practice as 
practised by this government over the last nine years, but specifically the 
last three or four.  And rigging the electoral boundaries which have since, 
of course, been found to be unconstitutional, is just one of those many, 
many examples of undemocratic actions by the government. 
 
For something interesting to do over the last few days, I've been 
re-reading some of the speeches from the government members prior to this 
last Bill being passed.  And I found it interesting that some of the 
members hailed this legislation as some of the most progressive electoral 
boundaries legislation in Canada.  They said that it would stand the test 
of the constitutional scrutiny.  Some of the ministers said that this Bill 
and this legislation would further representative government in Canada, in 
Saskatchewan, and in fact said that this legislation was among the fairest 
in all of Canada and the fairest ever in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman.  In 
fact throughout those speeches there are many comments regarding 
self-congratulations by members of the government about this very 
progressive, democratic, and fair, boundaries legislation. 



 

 

 
In the face of grave concerns by this side of the House, by the 
constitutional people at the universities, and by a number of people in the 
public, the government proceeded with the legislation as they have so often 
done in this House.  In the face of concerns by the public, as they have 
done with the splitting off of SaskEnergy from SaskPower, where the auditor 
says that it was done without the proper authority.  Like they tried to do 
with SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), again stopped by the courts. 
 
It seems as though this government is always stymied by the courts, Mr. 
Chairman.  And again I think that we're always in the courts and that says 
something about the way this government does business.  We've been in the 
courts on many issues and that says something about the way this government 
conducts its business.  And it also says something about, as an example, of 
how this government has mismanaged the financial affairs of the province, 
where we're always in courts fighting court battles as a province because 
things aren't done correctly in the first place.  And this is no more truer 
than has been the case on the electoral boundaries. 
 
And so the gerrymander didn't work despite all the assurances, and by the 
minister, that this legislation would stand the test of the 
constitutionality.  The court decision by the Appeal Court, Mr. Chairman, 
was clear.  It was unequivocal; it was unanimous that the electoral 
boundaries of the government of Saskatchewan were unconstitutional, and 
here we are off to court again.  Mr. Chairman, we're back here again, this 
time supposedly to do this job correctly.  We made it clear to the 
government when they tried to make a deal outside of the legislature, that 
we insisted on coming back to the legislature to do this properly this 
time, in full public view, in the spirit of co-operation with all of the 
political parties, and no secret deals would be allowed, Mr. Chairman. 
 
As I talked on Friday about my major concerns I emphasized . . . and I 
emphasize here again tonight, for the Minister of the Family who finds this 
amusing, who finds the fact that this government has brought the province 
to a constitutional crisis where they've botched up the economic affairs of 
the province.  They've botched up the financial affairs of the province, 
and he has botched up the social programs of this province.  Now they've 
brought the province to a constitutional crisis, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So I emphasize that our major concerns has been, after all that has 
happened, there has been no proper consultation on this Bill before us 
today, no proper consultation in the legislature.  There has been no 
consultation in establishing the commissioners for this commission.  I hope 
to get some explanation from the minister as to why the Clerk isn't a 
member of this commission.  I hope to get some explanation from the 
minister as to why all the commissioners are men, and why they're all from 
Regina.  I think these are valid questions that the government has got to 
account for. 
 
(2045) 
 
As well I think that the minister while he is now indicating . . . And 
we've seen him forward an amendment that would require public hearings, and 



 

 

I appreciate that.  I think it's interesting how on earth the requirement 
to have public hearings could have been left out of this Bill.  And, Mr. 
Chairman, it's not surprising that the requirement for public hearings were 
left out of the Bill because this government has not been concerned about 
public input and consultation, which has been obvious regarding the GRIP 
and NISA programs that were discussed earlier today, this evening. 
 
Mr. Chairman, on balance -- having made some of those critical comments 
that I feel had to be made -- on balance I believe that the Bill does not 
violate the conclusions that were released in the Court of Appeal's 
judgement. 
 
The commission is directed to follow the equality principles, section 11 of 
the Bill, and is to use its discretion on any variations from the norm, Mr. 
Chairman.  And I do have a couple of suggestions, when we come to those 
sections, for the minister that would relate to requirements, requirements 
that the commission put in writing exceptions to the norm.  I think that's 
something that should be required from the commission. 
 
What I do appreciate is that the government this time did not prescribe all 
the rules and tie the hands of the commission like they did last time.  I 
think the commission . . . Well obviously I've expressed some concerns 
about the composition of the commission, and as my colleague from Saskatoon 
. . . I think the commissioners will make their judgements, I think, in 
using their professional integrity.  They know that the province, and in 
fact because of the nature of this case to be held before the Supreme 
Court, that many in Canada will be watching these boundaries, and that the 
professional integrity of the commissioners will be shown in adhering to 
this equality provision.  And I am confident, Mr. Chairman, that the 
commissioners will comply with the spirit and the conclusions of the Appeal 
Court decision. 
 
As I indicated, I have a number of questions that I would like to ask the 
minister, but before I do that -- these are on specific sections -- I'll 
take my seat so some of my colleagues can make a few comments. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Do you want to do them now, Bob?  Do you want to do it 
all under the first . . . 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Would you like me to raise all my questions now?  Okay. 
 
With regard to the Bill, I refer to section 2(g), Mr. Minister, and 
regarding voter population as being used to determine the constituency 
population quotient.  And I understand what that means and I realize this 
is based on the '86 election results which is some four and a half years 
ago now.  And I guess a bit of a concern I have is that with out-migration, 
the population shifts, I wonder how accurate those population numbers would 
be. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I'd like to maybe have your response to this section in 
relation to section 11(5)(b).  Mr. Minister, this section 2(g) in relation 
to section 11(5)(b) where that speaks to using the '88 federal boundaries 
to define the constituency boundaries.  In other words I found it a bit 



 

 

curious, if I understand this, a bit curious while we're using section 2(g) 
to arrive at the constituency population quotient and no reference made to 
the '88 federal numbers, yet section 11(5)(b) uses the federal '88 
boundaries to help arrive at the provincial constituency boundaries. 
 
So I'm not sure how on the one case where we're using the boundaries to the 
constituencies and we're using the '88 results, how we're not using those 
as well in upgrading the numbers in section 2(g).  That's one question I 
have. 
 
Section 3(2), commission members . . . 
 
Do you want to answer that now?  Okay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let me indicate, the hon. member made a few comments and 
the . . . I was surprised after the hon. member from Regina Centre's 
comments on harmonization of GST (goods and services tax) that he would 
never make a comment to be read into the record again, but I appreciate 
very much the aside. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Having said that, the hon. member gave a somewhat lengthy 
criticism.  Let me just indicate that the following jurisdictions with plus 
or minus 25 per cent as the deviation from the norm:  Canada, B.C., 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario by custom, Quebec, and Newfoundland.  Here 
are the following provinces that accept plus or minus thirty-three and a 
third per cent deviation:  New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and P.E.I.  Here are 
the jurisdictions with no limit to variance:  North West Territory and the 
Yukon. 
 
It is interesting to note that in the North West Territories the individual 
who prepared the report, the boundaries commission, accepted no limit on 
variation, is the same individual wrote the judgement at the Court of 
Appeal in Saskatchewan -- rather interesting.  Secondly, Manitoba accepts 
plus or minus 25 per cent in a certain part of the province and 10 per cent 
in the other.  I just read that into the record to respond to the hon. 
member. 
 
A couple of other things.  You said that there was no consultation.  The 
hon. member may be aware that I did send letters to each of the parties . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . Well no, we weren't sitting at the time.  
And your point is technically correct that that's not in here.  I suppose 
that the debate could at that point go on for quite some period of time.  I 
think most indicated that they wanted to get certainty as quickly as 
possible, given the time constraints, and if you're offended by that, I'll 
apologize.  I did send the names out; you're right, no consultation in 
here. 
 
But the information was forwarded, and I believe the tenor of my letter, 
and I think specifically, words to the effect of it, the proposal meets 
with your approval.  So technically you're right in here, but in fact that 
information was certainly out there.  And as I indicated at the time, that 



 

 

I had raised the matter with the Chief Justice and certainly discussed the 
matter with him. 
 
The point that you raised about the reasons . . . It's interesting to note 
that the last commission in fact gave reasons for variations in many cases, 
and did so in its report.  As a matter of fact, one of the commissioners 
quite upset to have it tainted, that there were no reasons given.  One may 
disagree with the reasons but in fact was quite, as I say, adamant that in 
the last report reasons were given for variation. 
 
Now it may be a fair point to make an argument as to how specific the 
reasons may be.  And I'm assuming -- and I think I'm fairly assuming -- 
that given the Court of Appeal decision, the constraint that the present 
commissioners are under that they will recognize if they're going to have 
some discrepancy, they will in all likelihood very much justify the reason 
for that or reasons for that. But again, I just do caution the honourable 
member that in the last commission's report they did indicate reasons for 
variation. 
 
You then make the point, the point about 2(g).  One of the factors, and 
I've made it clear publicly, that one of the things we try to do in 
addition to complying with the Court of Appeal, was to have, you know, as 
few fundamental changes as from the previous Act so that this process could 
be accelerated and moved along as quickly as possible.  That's, for 
example, the question of 66, why 66.  We could have opened that debate up 
and numerous other matters could well have been opened up and discussed. 
 
I think I've made the point publicly that this really is an interim 
measure.  That after the next election I would expect that future 
legislatures deal with some of the peripheral issues that have been 
discussed by political scientists and those interested in the political 
process in Saskatchewan.  For example, consideration of representation by 
population -- that may well be a matter to be discussed. 
 
An area that I have had a great deal of personal sympathy for, and matter 
of fact would say that I would like to see, is guaranteed seats for 
natives.  And I've made that argument in this House.  I was disparaged by 
the opposition when I raised that a few years back, and some may recall the 
debates.  But I still believe that there are some merits in that proposal. 
 
So there are some pretty fundamental questions that will have to be dealt 
with by future legislatures.  And again I think that most recognize this as 
an interim measure. 
 
So you ask the question of voter population, again that was the same.  But 
that was also the Canada Elections Act 1988, this is your 2(g) . . . the 
question you raised about 2(g) in conjunction with section 11.  And 
understand that section 11 . . . these are matters that can be taken into 
consideration, okay?  So these are not mandatory; these are things that can 
be taken into by the commission.  So they're not contradictory in any way 
and if you look at 11 as things to be taken into account, they may put 
different weight to them.  That's very much in the hands of the commission.  
So if you keep that in mind then they're not contradictory. 



 

 

 
Mr. Pringle: -- Could I just clarify, Mr. Minister, section 2(g) does not 
refer to the federal '88 more updated information though.  That's clearly 
just the '86 results. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Sorry, you're quite correct. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Okay, thank you.  I want to come back a little bit, later 
on, to the request to have the commission put in writing specific reasons 
for variations from the norm, because I think that's very important 
particularly in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in relations 
as well to the B.C. decision. 
 
Mr. Minister, just in passing, a response to your letter to us.  I was 
talking about the process of consultation inside a legislature, and so a 
letter to us I don't view as proper consultation.  So, just to clarify that 
for the record. 
 
The question regarding Section 3(2), the commission members, and I did 
appreciate your comment regarding an aboriginal representative, but I want 
to just ask you how you arrived at the names of the commissioners.  I would 
like to suggest that we would have been very open to discussing 
possibilities and could have handled that very quickly in the Assembly here 
rather than just appointing names, as you have done, I might add, when you 
appointed the Ombudsman, the chief commissioner, and the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
(2100) 
 
This is what I was expressing a concern about earlier, is the lack of 
regard for consultation and input from the opposition particularly related 
to servants of the Assembly.  And we see this practice here again in just 
selecting commissioners, and I'm not talking about the individuals here but 
just lack of a process inside the legislature which is a concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So how you arrive at selecting the commissioners, I would like to know.  
And why you decided not to include the Clerk, I would like to know -- or 
any gender parity.  Why you chose to have just people from Regina.  And I'd 
like to ask you if it's your understanding or your view that the Chief 
Electoral Officer, given his role on the last commission and I might say, 
his defence of the boundaries that have been ruled unconstitutional, his 
defence of those as being very fair, what role if any the Chief Electoral 
Officer will play as a staff member or in consultation with the 
commissioners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let me work backwards to your series of questions.  One, 
we didn't make reference to Chief Electoral Officer given the comments of 
the Court of Appeal.  And so the commission will choose its staff. 
 
Secondly, again with the greatest respect to the hon. member, you are 
hanging your hat on the fact that we didn't consult in the legislature, 
which I have acknowledged.  But to hang your hat and say that political 



 

 

parties have to wait till the legislature . . . you said that's not 
consultation until we do it here.  I don't think you're going that far that 
political parties cannot consult unless the legislature is sitting.  I 
don't think anyone would go quite that far. 
 
And I did put in my letter we would submit this proposal for your 
consideration.  And that's the exact word I used at that time.  I have 
acknowledged that we didn't in the House.  Obviously at some point the 
government would have to make some suggestions, and all would accept that. 
 
The individuals, and again I indicated that I did talk to the Chief 
Justice, but Dr. Archer had been involved as secretary to the last 
commission.  He's very familiar with the process.  Mr. Justice Malone had 
been involved in the federal electoral boundaries, so he's very familiar 
with the process.  And Mr. Barclay had been involved in commissions in the 
past, so certainly again very familiar with the process. 
 
Again, your point about gender representation and geographic 
representation, that's fair criticism.  I'm not disagreeing with you, other 
than we were concerned, as I think most were, and I can refer to comments 
made by opposition members about get a new commission immediately and don't 
wait.  We did try and get a process and a system that would move as quickly 
as possible, and certainly if we had a great deal of time, then as I say, 
more fundamental issues may well have been discussed as well as the 
commission. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, just a comment and 
I guess a question in passing.  Number five . . . section 5(2) and (3), it 
says in the case of a vacancy, and I certainly hope there isn't, but in the 
case of a vacancy the Lieutenant Governor may fill the vacancy.  The 
existing legislation says that the vacancy must be filled and I would 
suggest "must".  It's not a big issue.  But I assume that that may be 
because of the time constraints. 
 
But section 3 I found interesting because it says that while we weren't 
consulted on the actual commissioners, the Lieutenant Governor is required 
to consult the opposition parties on a replacement in the case of a 
vacancy.  So I found that inconsistent and should have been the case on 
both accounts. 
 
But specifically, a couple of questions on section 7, section 7(2).  And 
regarding the expenditures, and in keeping with the auditor's concern that 
expenditures be duly authorized -- and I might be missing this -- but I 
don't see any statutory authority in the Bill to be making payments, 
expenditures for commissioners.  And I wonder if there's nothing here or 
I'm missing that somewhere. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well you'll notice that there is provision in 7(1), 
entitled to an allowance to be fixed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, 
and I'm advised that that's the authority. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the "may fill the vacancy".  Again, that could 
depend, for example, supposing the commission is . . . pick a percentage, 



 

 

75 per cent completed its work and whether a third one is necessary if a 
vacancy occurs.  So it's just a flexible position.  Certainly the 
circumstances then become totally different. 
 
At that point we now have a commission out there that is well working.  It 
is in everybody's interest at that point to have that commission with a 
high degree of public credibility.  And so if a vacancy occurs that has to 
be filled, then we've made the provision that the other two registered 
political parties with 5 per cent, I think, shall be consulted.  It's not 
optional at that point because the commission will be operating in the 
public at that point. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Section 8(1) says that: "The commission is not an agent of Her Majesty in 
right of Saskatchewan."  Now I understand what that's saying, this section 
is not in the existing Bill.  And I'm wondering what the rationale was for 
adding this section.  Does this have to do with liability or just what is 
the reason for this section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It's to confirm the independence of the commission. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Okay.  Section 9(1) speaks to the requirement to prepare a 
report with recommendations respecting boundaries.  Mr. Minister, it says a 
report is required but there are no time lines here, and it doesn't make 
any reference to an interim report so I assume that there's no interim 
report required here.  And I guess given that we're four and a half years 
into the government's mandate, what's your reason for not giving a time 
line for the commission to return the report to the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The commission is fairly well aware of the need to deal 
with this as expeditiously as possible. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Now I don't doubt that but I thought that was interesting . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We don't want an interim report from you. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- No, I was noticing that that wasn't here and was asking.  
But I guess it's a concern in this regard, Mr. Minister, and that is with 
regard to public consultation that you've agreed to put in as an amendment 
to the Bill. 
 
When does public consultation occur?  Before the report is drafted?  
Obviously then there won't be an opportunity after.  It seemed that the 
interim report concept, the last time . . . while you weren't open to a 
number of amendments that many people would have liked to have seen, us and 
a bunch of the public, it seems to me that the interim report does have a . 
. . particularly since we've done this wrong once before, an interim report 
does have some merit.  That is something to react to so that this is done 
properly and fair this time.  So I am not demanding it personally, but I 
was a bit surprised that you didn't see any merits to an interim report. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again that's simply a matter of time.  I expect what the 
commission will do is begin work with the data and then draw up the map 
that they will agree on, and then take that map out for public 
consultation.  I'm assuming that that's the process.  An interim report 
would have obviously delayed the process.  I can't tell you how long, but 
I'd expect that that's the procedure the commission will use.  Once they 
have a map out for proposal, they will hold the public meetings.  I do 
indicate to the hon. members, and I think I did in the second reading, that 
two ways to accelerate the process are to have fewer public meetings, 
without putting a number on that, and have those that are concerned go to 
the public meetings instead of have the commission hold a great number, say 
in every riding. 
 
So that can accelerate the process.  And as I said, an acceleration of the 
final map assuming, assuming, and I'm only assuming for discussion 
purposes, that the Supreme Court upholds the Court of Appeal, that another 
way to dramatically speed up the preparation of the final map is if the 
parties accept that the existing poll boundaries that are there under the 
present map be accepted for the next map.  And I realize that there may be 
some changes whereby you may go back to some of those A and B polls and 
that sort of thing, but it saves a dramatic amount of surveying and 
drafting time if the poll boundaries are accepted. 
 
But that's not a decision that the commission has to make because the 
commission . . . Once the map is done and approved, then obviously the 
legislation all has to be prepared and the Chief Electoral Officer has to 
deal with the poll boundaries. 
 
You understand what I'm saying -- that all of those poll boundaries take 
surveys and everything else so just if we're trying, if we're trying to 
accelerate the process, and I think that was the interest of all, that that 
is one way to significantly accelerate the process and I doubt that it 
impairs anybody.  I don't know how it would.  But having said that, that is 
something for consideration. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, are you saying that it's your expectation 
that the commission will hold public hearings once the map has been 
drafted?  And then I assume that based on the public hearings, where there 
would be ample opportunity for representation, that changes could take 
place and then it would come back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I would envision it happening that they would have the 
map that they are comfortable with, hold the public hearings if there's 
matters that warrant them making the changes.  They would do that or reject 
the changes for whatever reasons and then give us the report as to why they 
didn't accept them, at the end of the day, and why they did what they did. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- So if I understand you correctly, what you're saying is 
that in fact there will be an interim report.  Not to the same degree as 
last time, but if the map is going to be drawn and then public hearings 
will occur, and then some changes could result from those public hearings 
-- in a sense that's an interim report, not to the House but . . . 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I've explained how I would see the process working.  If 
you want to call that an interim report, that's not what I would call an 
interim report.  But I don't think that that debate takes us too far down 
the road.  You know, I just assume that the process will be one, they will 
prepare and draw up a map from the data and whatever they're taking into 
account and that's what they'll take out for public discussion. 
 
Those that have concerns about it can raise it at the public meetings and 
then if they are to make modifications or changes, and take into account 
what's brought to their attention in the public meetings, and then they 
would do the report to this Assembly after all of that's done.  So I mean, 
if you want to call it an interim report, it's not how I would see an 
interim report.  But I just think they're going to prepare the map for 
consideration. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- But, Mr. Minister, there will be a map.  There will be 
defined constituencies.  Hopefully there will be some explanation for 
variances from the norm.  I would like to see that file -- that initial 
report, that initial map filed with the legislature, in the legislature.  
Are you open to making that requirement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I have set no rules on the commission and how the 
commission carries out its business.  I will certainly pass on to the 
commission your suggestion.  But I think that we should keep in mind if 
it's being made public -- I mean if you want a copy sent here, but if it's 
being made public -- then I would have thought that was adequate. 
 
But nowhere in here are we setting rules on the commission of how it's 
going to carry out its business.  And we certainly don't want those rules 
in.  But I mean, if there's a request to the commission that the copy go 
first to the legislature, any member can go ahead and write that letter.  I 
mean it doesn't matter.  As long as it's being made public I don't quite 
understand why that may not be adequate.  But perhaps there are arguments 
otherwise.  I miss them if there are. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, it seems to me that if we're going to do this properly, there 
should be a provision in here for some kind of interim report.  At a 
minimal that interim report, as my colleague, the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview has indicated, should consist of the proposed map of constituency 
boundaries, a written description of the boundaries, an indication of the 
population of each proposed riding, and an explanation about how the 
boundary was arrived at. 
 
And that should be filed with the Assembly as has traditionally been the 
case when boundaries are redrawn, and of course should be made available to 
the public.  And there should be a specific indication in the legislation, 
Mr. Minister, that public hearings are then to be held, based on that 
proposed map or interim report.  And I don't understand why you haven't put 
this in the legislation, and I'd suggest to you that you bring in a House 



 

 

amendment to make the procedure clear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well I am not going to . . . I have indicated that if any 
members of the Assembly or anybody interested in the political process 
wants to write to the commission, express their views as to how the 
commission should operate, what process it should follow, that's quite 
proper.  And they may agree with alacrity to any one suggestion.  But I am 
somewhat concerned about suggesting rules to the commission when the whole 
thrust of the Court of Appeal decision is to give them, you know, as much 
leeway as possible. 
 
I don't for a minute expect the commission to be unreasonable.  I don't for 
a minute expect the commission to not understand -- and I went through the 
qualifications -- understand the need to deal with this as fairly and as 
quickly as possible, with public input, a chance for the public to express 
their views or concerns or suggestions, before what they are prepared to 
stand behind they forward to this Assembly.  And you'll notice that when 
they get that done, they are to forward it to the Assembly. 
 
So I'm concerned about beginning the process now of starting to put rules 
on the commission.  I have some confidence that if any member has matters 
to raise with the commission, or notify us, to let them know immediately.  
And again, one of the main thrusts here is that these people are going to 
make their rules on how they're going to operate. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, I guess the point we're trying to make here 
is that it is the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan that is charged with 
giving the mandate, and the clear mandate to the commission.  That's the 
point we're trying to make. 
 
And last time where you prescribed all the rules . . . it's just that you 
prescribed the rules in an unconstitutional way.  This time you've given, 
in a sense you've given very broad discretion to the commission to get the 
job done, which I appreciate.  But it's almost loosey-goosey this time, 
which doesn't satisfy us and many members of the public when this thing has 
been botched up once before. 
 
And so a requirement of the process could have been started earlier.  It 
didn't have to wait until well into April before the legislature came back 
into session.  There are many reasons why we should have been back here 
earlier; this could have been one on them. 
 
And the request for an interim report is not an unusual request and it's 
not an unreasonable request.  And in a sense, you've indicated that in an 
unofficial way that's going to happen anyway.  What we're trying to do is 
to do this correctly this time and to give the commission a clear mandate.  
And I've tried to point out, as my colleague has, there are a few areas 
where this whole thing is a bit too loosey-goosey, and that's no reflection 
on the commission members. 
 
I wonder if you could just clarify.  I wasn't sure just how you saw the 
role of the Chief Electoral Officer in all of this in terms of advising the 
commission.  And I realize that the legislation allows the commission to 



 

 

appoint their own staff members, but I understand that the Chief Electoral 
Officer is looking at some of the boundary poll results and information 
already.  So do you see the Chief Electoral Officer as playing any role 
here in advising the commission along the way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again I've made it clear that the commission has the 
prerogative of choosing its own staff and personnel.  I would practically 
expect that they would be talking to the Chief Electoral Officer, but 
again, that's their call.  That's where all that information is stored. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, as you 
well know the Chief Electoral Officer is a partisan appointment by your 
government.  In my opinion, Mr. Minister, he should have no role in this 
process whatsoever.  We should be looking at a situation where there are 
independent staff advising the commission and the Chief Electoral Officer, 
in my judgement, should not be one of those staff.  And I'm wondering, Mr. 
Minister, if you would be prepared to bring in a House amendment that would 
ensure that in fact from now on the Chief Electoral Officer doesn't play a 
role in this process because I really think it's highly inappropriate that 
he does.  And I've no doubt about the current process being one in which he 
will play a significant staff role. 
 
Last time we had the absurd situation of the Chief Electoral Officer being 
on the commission and that was  
 Dhighly partisan, Mr. Minister, and it resulted in the gerrymander that we 
saw last time, in part, in my judgement.  And I suggest to you, sir, that 
it is now high time to ensure that the Chief Electoral Officer, as a 
partisan appointment of your government, plays no role whatsoever in the 
drafting of constituency electoral boundaries. 
 
Now let's do this thing right for once.  Why not bring in a House amendment 
indicating that the Chief Electoral Officer will not play a part in the 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I've indicated that we have made no . . . put no 
requirements or obligations on the commission.  But I do . . . And I have 
some difficulty because I hold the hon. member in very high regard.  But 
where were you, sir, when Carole Bryant, now on your campaign strategy 
committee, sat as a fiercely independent Chief Electoral Officer and you 
held her up as being independent, fair, and non-partisan?  Where were you 
when Don McMillan, a highly partisan NDP (New Democratic Party) . . . Where 
were you when Dickson Bailey was the Chief Electoral Officer?  Dickson 
Bailey, an NDP candidate, an NDP candidate in the last federal election was 
the Chief Electoral Officer? 
 
All I'm saying to you, sir, all I'm saying to you, with the greatest 
respect, is you can get into that debate for some time.  You can get into 
that debate for some time, but don't stand here and say you've got clean 
hands, because you didn't, you didn't. 
 
So having said that, what we have done quite clearly throughout this is 
that the commission will set its own rules, hire its people, do whatever 
it's going to do. 



 

 

 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I respect 
the Minister of Justice for his debating abilities.  But I must say, Mr. 
Chairman, that in this case the Minister of Justice has just made my point 
for me. 
 
The point being, Mr. Minister, that the Chief Electoral Officer is a 
partisan appointment.  The Chief Electoral Officer was a partisan 
appointment when we were in government and the current Chief Electoral 
Officer is a partisan appointment by your government and I accept that.  
The point that I'm trying to make is that the Chief Electoral Officer 
should not be playing a role in the drafting of constituency boundaries. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when we were in government, the Chief Electoral Officer 
was not on the commission.  Last time when you appointed a commission you 
appointed a commission with the Chief Electoral Officer on it and we found 
that to be highly inappropriate and I must say, Mr. Minister, that in my 
judgement affected the impartiality of the commission. 
 
Now this time my suggestion to you is that we not only not have the Chief 
Electoral Officer on the commission -- and he's not on this commission -- 
but that we do not have him in a staff capacity either, that we in effect 
remove the Chief Electoral Officer from the process of drafting 
constituency boundaries.  And I ask you if you would bring in a house 
amendment that would accomplish that objective. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The hon. member and I may find common ground if we are to 
accept his argument is on the following process, and that is an independent 
Chief Electoral Officer.  And that may be a matter well to be discussed by 
the future legislature.  I have raised a couple of matters on this 
including proportional representation and seats for natives and perhaps a 
permanent independent Chief Electoral Officer.  And I think that that has 
some merit.  And I say on that we would find common ground. 
 
But again, I think that, you know, we have brought in legislation that they 
will choose their staff.  And if you're arguing that these commissioners 
cannot deal with the matter fairly, then I think you should make that 
argument.  Either they have the ability to deal with the matter and the 
information that's brought forward to them and to deal with it fairly or 
they don't.  And I happen to believe that they do. 
 
I am prepared to rely on their judgement.  I am prepared to rely on their 
abilities to make those decisions.  And again, I have freely acknowledged 
to the hon. member and the members opposite that if there was a great deal 
of time or a greater amount of time to get this task accomplished, then 
many changes would be made.  And the debate would be, I believe, a rather 
interesting one, one that in the future I'll probably be sorry I missed. 
 
But having said that, we do have -- and I think the hon. member recognizes 
-- the need to do this as quickly as possible.  And so having said that, I 
have the confidence in the individual members of the commission that they 
will use their good judgement and will act fairly, take the information 
that they have from whatever source it may be, to deal with it fairly, and 



 

 

to give a map to the people of this province that they are prepared to 
submit as being fair, and I think that's ultimately what we all have to 
look forward to. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, my point here . . . I've made most of the 
points I want to make on this regard.  We clearly disagree. 
 
But the final point I want to make is that let's not be under any illusions 
about how this process works.  It is the staff who will presumably draft a 
plan for the commissioners to see.  It is the staff who will review the 
population data and then make a determination about what the new boundaries 
will look like.  Obviously the Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Minister, has 
full access to the poll-by-poll voting results in each riding. 
 
And what I want to ensure, Mr. Minister, is that we don't have a situation 
in which the information with respect to population is integrated with the 
information on poll-by-poll voting results.  That, in a nutshell, is what I 
want to ensure does not happen.  I want no regard at all to be paid to 
poll-by-poll voting results when these new maps are drawn up, Mr. Minister. 
 
And therefore I'm not questioning the integrity of the Chief Electoral 
Officer, but I am saying that he is a politically partisan appointment who 
should not be involved in providing staff information and proposals on what 
the boundaries should look like.  I just think that is common sense, Mr. 
Minister, and I ask you to suggest otherwise.  I mean why not just take the 
Chief Electoral Officer out of the process entirely, and why not have 
independent staff provided to the commission that are not associated in any 
way with the office of the Chief Electoral Officer, so that the boundaries 
are, in effect, drawn up with no regard at all paid to previous election 
voting results. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I don't know what factors they're going to take into 
account and they have the option to take whatever course of action they 
wish to take.  That's precisely why we have not put any requirements or 
obligations on the commission as to how they want to proceed.  But again, I 
think the hon. member has to recognize that if you're prepared to accept 
that these people are individuals of integrity, that they will take 
information . . . I have no doubt, with the present member excepted, that 
whatever information is brought forward by any member of this Assembly, or 
any candidate out there, will probably have at least a modest amount of 
partisan taint to it.  And when they appear before the commission 
expressing support for, or concern with whatever the map may look like, 
that someone from your party, or someone from our party, or any other 
political party out there appears before, they may have -- again I've 
accepted the partisan matter, the hon. member -- some partisan interest in 
making some change. 
 
Now I will have the confidence -- well I should accept both of them, my 
apologies -- that the commission will hear all of us out.  They will hear 
all of those interested in the process out, and then they will have to make 
a decision.  And they will get lots of partisan information.  They will get 



 

 

it being brought forward, I suggest, by all of us or all political parties.  
That again, as you say, is part of this process. 
 
So I just don't assume that they will bend to that or bow to that.  I know 
they won't.  They recognize, I think it fair to say, that the map 
ultimately being presented by them to this Assembly is one that they will 
have to not defend so much but at least understand that it's got to have a 
very high degree of public credibility.  And again, with that, I take 
comfort in that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think you skirted my 
colleague's issue.  We're not talking about any concern about the 
commission appointing and hiring their own staff apart from the Chief 
Electoral Officer for the regions that were indicated.  And I think that 
it's a little bit naive to believe that if the Chief Electoral Officer, who 
is partisan, is drafting the plan with all the information on computer from 
the last exercise, that the commissioners are going to be in a position to 
take issue with those numbers and boundaries.  But the need to take the 
Chief Electoral Officer out of this relates to a question I have on section 
11, the rules for fixing the boundaries. 
 
And as per your last, or the existing legislation, the commission can vary 
from the norm for geographical reasons, physical features of the ridings 
and third, a special community of interest.  Now, special community of 
interest -- whatever that means -- was the major argument of the 
government's position in the two days of court hearings in the Court of 
Appeal. 
 
In fact, your lawyers were not able to define what special community of 
interest means to the satisfaction of the judges, even though your lawyers 
said that special community of interest is more important than equality of 
voter rights.  Yet they could not define what that term meant.  And I guess 
in the face of the B.C. decision, as I understand it, that said that 
deviations could only be allowed if they were demonstrably justified and in 
many respects the Appeal Court decision in Saskatchewan was more clear on 
this point because it related, as well, to the charter, that there had to 
be equality under the legislation -- equality of voters rights -- and they 
made some reference to favouring something like plus or minus five per 
cent. 
 
I guess it goes back to my question regarding written reasons for 
exceptions that vary from the norm.  And I would like to see some 
requirement in the Bill that requires the commission to specifically 
identify why any particular riding might vary from the quotient. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let me respond.  If you go back to the Bill that went 
into affect in '81, I believe, under the New Democratic Party 
administration, it made reference that the commission could take into 
account any special community or diversity of interests, inhabitants of 
various regions of the province.  So that's the source of that phraseology 
and section. 
 
Secondly, the Court of Appeal did, in fact, find community of interests as 



 

 

it applied to the northern ridings.  So it's not that they . . . they did.  
Very difficult to define.  I'm not taking issue with the hon. member, but 
they did in fact find some community of interest. 
 
Thirdly, we should keep in mind the plus or minus 5 per cent, one of the 
errors, at least in our view, in the Court of Appeal.  The Court of Appeal 
made reference to the federal Saskatchewan boundaries commission whereby . 
. . and they said plus or minus 5 per cent.  In fact that was based on 
total population, not voter population.  So they were comparing apples and 
oranges when they made that reference.  So we were a little surprised that 
they didn't pick up the difference. 
 
Having said that, I've given you the source of that.  I have not in any way 
disagreed with the point you make that that can be difficult to define, but 
there is some track record for it and we do have at least the northern 
seats as an example where that community of interest may well be. 
 
Whether the court could do . . . or the commission, and I only say it 
because I would only be speculating whether they decide that there should 
be rural and urban ridings combined.  I don't know whether that would fit 
under community of interest or not, but it's certainly something that one 
may or may not make the argument that that would fit in that category. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, I wasn't taking issue with the notion of 
community of interest.  There's nothing wrong with that being one of the 
exceptions, considerations to the exceptions from the norm.  I was using 
that in the context of my concern about the Chief Electoral Officer being 
part of drawing up the boundaries. 
 
And secondly, that you used that concept unsuccessfully to the satisfaction 
of the judge, but that concept has been more important, without being able 
to define it, more important than equal voting power.  So those are the 
points in which I was . . . the context in which I was mentioning that.  
But you forgot my question related to the requirement that any variations, 
that is under the norm, be put in writing by the commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We should keep in mind that these commissioners now have 
the Court of Appeal judgement and its reasons to take into account, so I 
have little doubt that they will take those into account in their 
deliberations. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, when I talked to you earlier about time 
lines, no time lines for the commission, I mentioned that for another 
reason.  And it's a potential concern here that I have. 
 
If the session is in progress, then as I understand it from the Bill the 
report will be filed with the Speaker which would then immediately be 
available to all members.  I assume that's the case.  Okay.  The potential 
concern I have is if the session is not . . . if we're not in session.  
Then if the commission is required to submit the report to the Speaker and 
it would not be made available to members until five days into another 
session, if I understand the Bill correctly. 
 



 

 

And a concern I have about this:  does this mean that this report could in 
fact go potentially a number of weeks without being made public after it is 
drafted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- That's not the intention and I've just mentioned that to 
the officials.  We'll look at a House amendment that when they've got it 
done, whether the House is in session or not, that it be tabled with the 
Clerk for public . . . you know, and available to the public at that time.  
Will that satisfy the point that you're raising?  It wasn't the intention.  
It was just taken from the traditional way of filing documents or reports 
before the Assembly.  It wasn't to stop the information being made public.  
So we'll look at a way to draft that up so it can be tabled when it's 
ready, whatever the situation in the House may be at that time. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- So just to clarify this, I think I understand you and I 
like what you're saying, that you will draft a House amendment.  When it's 
filed with the Speaker, it'll be made public even if the House isn't 
sitting.  Okay, I appreciate that. 
 
I guess another question, section 13, Mr. Minister.  Once the report is 
filed with the new boundaries . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- If I could, if we just . . . And we'll work along this 
line, if we just take section 12: 
 

 . . . shall immediately submit the report to the Speaker . . . 
 

who then may make the report public, who shall make the report public, and 
then take out all those other references to whether it's in session or not.  
Does that meet the point being made by the member? 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  We appreciate 
that. 
 
Section 13, it might just be that I need this clarified, Mr. Minister, that 
is, once the report is made public with the new proposed boundaries, it 
seems to me this section doesn't require the legislature to deal with this 
in any timely way.  And again I think about getting close to the five year 
deadline constitutionally for a government. 
 
If the House isn't sitting, so the report is public but the report could 
just sit there and have no action until the fall, which may very well put 
the province in a constitutional crisis, and I wonder if you'd thought of 
that.  And first of all it doesn't seem to me that the Bill requires the 
report to come back and be dealt with by the legislature in a timely 
fashion.  And assuming that that may not be the case until the fall, would 
that not put us in a major crisis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We're certainly making the assumption throughout that 
this commission is going to report as quickly as possible.  It would be 
dealt in this session, also keeping in mind the possibility that the 



 

 

Supreme Court may overrule the Court of Appeal.  Keeping in mind that the 
Supreme Court may overrule the Court of Appeal, in which case, do you want 
the commission to continue?  It shouldn't.  We obviously will have the 
legislation before us that's already been passed if it's . . . as I say, if 
the Supreme Court overrules the Court of Appeal. 
 
So we're just making the assumption that this matter is going to be dealt 
with fairly quickly and in this session, this spring, and I think 
everybody's trying to work to that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I want to 
come back to this question of the possibility of the Clerk being on the 
boundaries commission.  I was listening for you to answer that, and I think 
because there were a number of questions that you weren't able to deal with 
it. 
 
I'd just like to say that we would like to see the Clerk of the Assembly on 
the commission.  I certainly would very much like to see that because I see 
the Clerk as a position that is politically neutral.  The Clerk works with 
all political parties; the Clerk has a very good understanding of the 
process that's involved here and I think the Clerk has the respect of all 
parties inside this legislature and, I suspect, outside the legislature. 
 
When members of this side of the House were in government in the 1970s, the 
Clerk was always on the boundaries commission and I wonder if you would not 
consider at this point adding her name to the list of commissioners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again, at this time, there's obviously no reflection on 
the Clerk.  I indicated earlier that we were making as few changes, still 
complying with the Court of Appeal, as possible.  But secondly, there is a 
debate, and I think a fair one, as to whether the Clerk should or should 
not be involved in this process. 
 
Some make the argument that the actual operations of the legislature should 
be separate from this process completely.  And that has some merit and 
that's not a reflection of anyone when the argument is made.  So the debate 
is not quite as clear-cut as the hon. member has indicated.  As I say, 
there are schools of thought which indicate that the actual operation of 
the legislature should be separate from the development of the boundaries, 
setting up the seats that the members will represent. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to point out the fact that 
this process, with respect to drafting constituency boundaries, has been 
going on for some time.  In fact before the boundaries Act, that got into 
so much trouble with our Court of Appeal in Saskatchewan, was brought 
forward by this government, there was a mechanism on the statute books that 
provided for the establishment of an impartial commission, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  And that provided for an independent process by which 
constituency boundaries in the province of Saskatchewan could be drawn up. 
 
But what happened is this government decided to get cute with the 
democratic rights of the people of Saskatchewan.  And they came to this 
legislature with an Act that set up a different set of rules.  And I 



 

 

remember the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden shouting across the legislature 
at that time saying they were going to win an election on their rules.  
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their rules have turned out to be illegal. 
 
I want to point out specifically that the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was on the independent committee in the 
former legislation that was on the books before this government decided to 
tamper with it.  They removed the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly from 
the commission and instead put on the Chief Electoral Officer, which is a 
partisan appointment as we heard the member from Saskatoon University speak 
about. 
 
And as we heard the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden reply to and attempt to, 
of course, distort the debate that was taking place in the legislature on 
the appointment of the Chief Electoral Officer to an independent commission 
to draft constituency boundaries in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this new Act that came forward from the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
government -- which at the time we had told them was probably 
unconstitutional and which I'm sure their battery of lawyers told them was 
probably unconstitutional -- but in spite of all these warnings and 
concerns, they pigheadedly proceeded with this legislation which we now 
know to be declared, at least in part, unconstitutional by the Court of 
Appeal in Saskatchewan. 
 
They arrogantly ignored very basic fundamental democratic rights of the 
people of Saskatchewan and came forward with their own tailor-made 
legislation which has in effect been thrown out by the highest court of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Now I know that that is under appeal to the 
Supreme Court but I still feel, personally, that it offended, the 
legislation that came forward, offended very basic democratic rights of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Court of Appeal decision refers to the urban and rural sections in the 
legislation with a clear indication that this sort of division is 
artificial and completely unnecessary.  And this speaks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to the attempt by the PC government to divide people in 
Saskatchewan, to divide farmers against workers, and to pit different 
peoples in the province against each other.  And that's been the policy of 
this government for the last four years as I've sat in this legislature and 
witnessed what's been going on.  And they've done it in a number of 
different ways, and we've spoken at it in this legislature at length. 
 
They've attempted to divide people and pit people against each other, and 
they have had no compunction whatsoever in flagrantly ignoring people's 
basic rights.  We've seen them attack the Legislative Counsel for example.  
We've seen them attack the Provincial Auditor.  We've seen them cut back 
funding to the Human Rights Commission.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are 
things unprecedented in this province. 
 
These kinds of attacks, this manner of ignoring people's very basic, 
fundamental rights . . . and I get the feeling that this government simply 
does not have a good sense of ethics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the broad 



 

 

sense of the word.  They do not have a good sense of ethics, and they do 
not understand basic, fundamental rights. 
 
And then after this legislation was overruled by the Court of Appeal, we 
see the government wanting to establish an independent commission through 
The Public Inquiries Act.  But obviously the correct procedure, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is to come before this house with a piece of legislation which 
they have now come to realize they have to do.  But I believe they wanted 
to avoid the legislature once again, by going through The Public Inquiries 
Act.  And I want to just say something about some of the problems that 
occur as a result of the change of boundaries initially in 1989, and now we 
may be looking at yet a further change. 
 
If you look at the constituency of Regina Lakeview, for example, it was cut 
right in half by the drafting of the boundaries in 1989 -- cut right in 
half.  As a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had to, in looking at new 
constituencies, leave behind half of my former constituency.  And that 
wasn't an easy thing to do.  And it causes disruption in the lives of 
people in the constituency who come to rely upon you as their 
representative in the legislature. 
 
And now we may be looking at a total new redraft.  And so once again people 
are wondering what is going to happen.  Are constituencies going to return 
to their former self?  Is Regina Hillsdale going to be moved further south?  
What's going to happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And here we are on the verge of having an election and we're looking 
probably at some fairly significant changes to constituencies in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have no reason however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to doubt the integrity of the 
commissioners, and so I believe that they will review fairly and properly 
the information that comes before them.  And in that regard, I wish once 
again to reiterate or to underline rather, the comments of my colleague 
from Saskatoon University, when he expresses concern about the Chief 
Electoral Officer being staff to the commission. 
 
The constituents of Regina Lakeview, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whom I now 
represent, and many people from the constituency of Regina Hillsdale, are 
most anxious to see an expeditious and fair resolution of this very serious 
problem that's been created through the incompetence of the government 
opposite. 
 
The constituents of Regina Hillsdale and Regina Lakeview simply want to get 
on with an election with their fundamental rights being adhered to, and 
they want to see an election, Mr. Speaker, so that this province can be put 
right side up once again with a New Democratic government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It's wearing on me when I always have to take the high 
road in response, but I'll continue to carry that burden, Mr. Chairman, and 
I will indicate to the hon. member that the Court of Appeal decision . . . 



 

 

and there is, I don't think, a lawyer in the country that doesn't believe 
that the Court of Appeal decision is precedent setting.  It does go 
contrary to that decision of the B.C. Court of Appeal, for example. 
 
For the hon. member to say that past history is always better, I think it 
fair to say that if we continued with the 1981 boundaries, that those would 
have been challenged. 
 
Thirdly, the hon. member should keep in mind that in the Northwest 
Territories, which had an independent boundaries commission which brought 
forward legislation, that independent boundaries commission was chaired by 
Mr. Justice Tallis of the Court of Appeal in Saskatchewan.  And that 
Northwest Territories legislation followed truly the recommendations of the 
independent boundaries commission.  That is now being challenged in the 
Court of the Northwest Territories as being contrary to the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms. 
 
So I think the hon. member has to recognize that one of the advantages of a 
charter is that there is hardly a piece of legislation around that can't be 
challenged by anyone.  But I will now list for the record the following 
provinces and jurisdictions that have intervened on behalf of the province 
of Saskatchewan:  Parliament of Canada, the province of British Columbia, 
Alberta, Quebec, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland, Northwest Territories, 
and the Yukon, have all intervened, as well as the Alberta association of 
rural municipalities. 
 
(2200) 
 
Those that are opposing the intervention are John F. Conway, Equal Justice 
for All, B.C. Civil Liberties Association, the voters group for Northwest 
Territories, in the city of Edmonton.  So I read that into the record that 
we can have a partisan debate here, to the hon. member; that with a charter 
you will have, as I say, most pieces of legislation will . . . can face 
challenges because of the charter, even though we have a process trying to 
bring legislation within the charter.  It is precedent setting and 
virtually every other lawyer in the province -- and I think in the country 
-- accepts that it is precedent setting.  So having said that, the Supreme 
Court will be making the decision.  Yes we'll try and move expeditiously. 
 
If I could come back to the point about the Clerk as well.  We were the 
only province using the Clerk; no other province had done that.  So the 
debate is that, that should the legislature be involved in the process -- 
as I say, some say no, but it's a matter of fair debate.  But keeping the 
legislature's office away from the process has also some merit, in response 
to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- It's interesting to note that when the Minister of 
Justice in Saskatchewan is taking the high road, he is very careful to 
identify to the people in the Assembly that he is taking the high road.  
There must be some reason for the Minister of Justice having to identify 
that fact. 
 
I have two concerns about this legislation, Mr. Chairperson.  And the main, 



 

 

major concern, of course, has to do with this Minister of Justice and his 
government's blatant attempt to manipulate the voters of Saskatchewan.  
That is my main concern, and that's been dealt with extensively here this 
evening. 
 
I want to deal with the secondary concern that I have with regard to this 
whole area of discussion and, Mr. Chairperson, that has to do with how does 
this process get started? 
 
First, the government brings in legislation, as they did before.  Then they 
establish the commission, as they did before and give it the instructions.  
The commission has hearings which last for some time.  The commission 
prints a report and draws maps and prints maps and circulates the maps, and 
I know that because I got the constituency of Westmount which had a error 
in the boundary of the constituency.  Later on I saw the final maps which 
had corrected the error and the final report is presented to the 
legislature. 
 
Now as a matter of interest, could the Minister of Justice tell us what 
that process costs?  What is the cost of preparing the legislation, setting 
up the commission, having the hearings, printing the reports, drawing the 
maps, and all those costs associated with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I don't have an answer to that question.  We'll try and 
get an estimate.  One should keep in mind that if you take a look at the 
legislation, members of the commission other than members who received a 
salary pursuant to the judge's act, so the judge's don't get paid 
additional salary because of that.  So we'll have to try and perhaps get an 
estimate.  I'm not sure exactly where.  I don't know what the last one 
cost, but we could try and find that information and get back to the hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I would appreciate getting that information from the 
Minister, Mr. Chairperson.  And of course all of those costs have to be 
duplicated again because the Appeal Court has ruled that the Act is not the 
Act that should be in place in Saskatchewan.  So all of those costs will 
have to be virtually doubled again. 
 
May I ask the Minister the next question.  Mr. Minister, what is the cost 
of you and your department appealing this to the Appeal Court in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again we'll have to . . . that's an estimates question.  
We'll try and get costs.  You may note that we did make a financial 
commitment to those opposing the reference, I forget the exact amount that 
we were paying.  I can't tell you that.  I can't tell you how much time in 
the law college was used by some of them to generate the case.  I can't 
answer that information.  I don't know whether I can get it all for you.  
We'll get what information we can for the honourable member.  Obviously 
there is a cost but I can't give you the exact amount. 
 
If I could submit this to the opposition -- and it's the proposed House 
amendment to deal with the matter of the legislature in session -- and if I 



 

 

could just interject now to send it over to you and give you a chance to 
look at the draft. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Chairperson, I would have thought that it would be 
a matter of interest to a government who is interested in cutting down the 
costs and increasing the efficiency of government, that they would have 
calculated the cost of setting up the commission, the cost of setting up 
the commission and going through it all again, the cost of going to the 
Appeal Court. 
 
And on top of that, Mr. Minister, I want to know what you have estimated or 
set aside to go to the Supreme Court of Canada?  What are the costs there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We haven't received an estimate, for example, from those 
intervening according to the offer.  So we don't have all of those costs. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- What we have here, Mr. Chairperson, is a minister and a 
government who manipulates the voters of Saskatchewan blatantly, and 
doesn't know the cost of their setting up their commissions, of printing, 
of their lawyers, banks of lawyers going to Appeal Court, has no estimate, 
not even a ballpark estimate of the cost of going to the Supreme Court of 
Canada.  All this from a government who spares no cost to manipulate the 
voters of Saskatchewan. 
 
That is what concerns me, Mr. Chairman.  The blatant effrontery of a 
government that will go through all of these steps at great cost to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, to take away the rights of the people of 
Saskatchewan, to circumvent the rights, the democratic rights of the people 
of Saskatchewan. And that's very serious in my view. 
 
Any government who will go to that extent and hang the cost is not a 
government that should be re-elected in Saskatchewan, quite frankly, Mr. 
Chairperson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I wish to indicate to the hon. member again, I have made 
reference to the fact that judges paid under the Judges Act do not get paid 
additional salaries because of this, and that secondly, we are using 
in-house counsel again, and I indicated to you we don't have an estimate 
from one of the ones that we had agreed to pay that were intervening 
against the government. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Chairman, let not the minister attempt to fob off 
the question with answers like, we're using in-house counsel. I am sure 
that his in-house counsel is busy on several fronts trying to keep this 
government out of jail, quite frankly, trying to keep this government out 
of the courts. 
 
They're fighting on all fronts.  They're under police investigation; 
they're under inquiries; they're before the courts.  So to say that we're 
using in-house counsel, they're taking staff away from some other case they 
must be fighting against the people of Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
I want to see the actual figures or in the case of the Supreme Court, an 
accurate as possible estimate of the cost that each step of this travesty 
of the democratic process of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairperson.  And I want to 
see that as soon as possible if the minister can possibly provide it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I indicated that those were questions for estimates.  I'm 
not going to demean the House, quite frankly, in responding to some of the 
comments you made and I'm not sure you want to get into some of the 
political debate about some of the comments you made.  So having that, it 
is a proper question for estimates and we can deal with it at that time. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to intervene just very briefly on this 
debate, to make I guess, three very quick points, short points.  First of 
all, I want to reiterate -- it's been said many times tonight -- that we on 
this side of the House, from the very beginning when this sorry episode 
began a couple of years ago, argued that the government's original 
legislation was flawed and amounted to a violation of the Canadian 
constitution -- Charter of Rights. 
 
And as importantly as that . . . it certainly, if it didn't violate the 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, violated the spirit of the democratic 
process, which is as important as the actual letter of the law.  And I 
regret -- and I want to share the observations of my colleagues -- that at 
the time the government saw fit to simply bulldoze ahead and to proceed 
with the legislation which is now impugned and subject to a Supreme Court 
decision. 
 
The second point that I wish to make is that we note by this legislation 
that the government now appears to be moving in the right direction, 
although belatedly, and I would add also, listening to the Attorney 
General, reluctantly.  But they're moving none the less under  
 Dpressure from the courts, the courts of law and the courts of public 
opinion.  For whatever reason, we think that this is a good direction and a 
good move and I can only hope that it's carried out with dispatch, but more 
than dispatch, it's carried out with dispatch and it's carried out in 
fairness, integrity, that the right decisions are made. 
 
I wish to state on behalf of the official opposition that we do not 
question the integrity of the commissioners that the minister has put 
forward for us to consider.  We know that they are independent.  We accept 
them.  We know that they will do their best.  They will do their job fairly 
and appropriately.  I say that without any equivocation whatsoever on 
behalf of all of my caucus members.  And I say so, while at the same time 
supporting the observations made by my colleagues from University and from 
Eastview and others, that leaving the personalities aside here for the 
moment, there needs to be improvement in future legislatures and future 
legislation as to the process of consultation to make it even better and 
more complete. 
 
But as far as the three individuals are concerned, we know that these are 
men of integrity and quality, and we have every confidence that they will 
do their job fairly and appropriately. 



 

 

 
The third and final point which I wish to make, Mr. Chairman, is as 
follows.  While we support the appointment of these people as 
commissioners, I think it's correct to say -- and I would not be remiss in 
my duty in stating -- that we in the opposition none the less reserve our 
right to comment on the commission's final report and to suggest 
improvements, of course, if necessary. 
 
This, I think, is only a natural right and duty of any opposition, and I'm 
sure that the government opposite understands, as do the commissioners 
understand, that we will be of course monitoring and observing and 
reserving our right to make such observations as may be necessary. 
 
So in conclusion, we hope the commission's able to do its work quickly and 
fairly, because that's what the people of Saskatchewan want -- an early 
election on fair and appropriate boundaries.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(2215) 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- There is a House amendment to clause 12.  Moved by the 
Minister of Justice: 
 

 Amend the printed Bill by deleting section 12 and substituting the 
following: 

 
 12  On completion of the commission's report required pursuant to section 

9, the chairperson of the commission shall immediately submit the report 
to the speaker who shall make the report available to the public and who, 
at the first opportunity, shall lay the report before the Assembly. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 13 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- House amendment to clause 17.  Moved by the Minister of 
Justice to: 
 

 Amend section 17 of the printed Bill: 
 
 (a) by striking out the word "may" where 

it appears therein and substituting therefor the word "shall". 



 

 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 18 and 19 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 52 -- An Act to provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into 
Constituencies for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I move that Bill 52 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:21 p.m. 
 


