





























































Hansard: June 11, 1991


 

 

June 11/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
legislature, 10 students seated in the Speaker's gallery from Midale 
Central School.  The teacher is Garth Holman and the bus driver is Sandra 
Holman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll be meeting with the students later so that I can have the 
opportunity to talk with them.  I hope that all the members welcome them to 
the legislature.  And I do hope in fact that they enjoy the session today.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce 
through you to the Assembly some 26 grade 4 students from the White City 
School.  They're in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They're accompanied by 
Mrs. Darlene Soeder and Mrs. Sylvia Sanderson.  I look forward to meeting 
with the students after question period for refreshments and pictures.  I 
hope all hon. members will join with me in welcoming the students from 
White City. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: -- It is my pleasure also to introduce a group of students.  
These students are grade 6 and 7 students from the town of Nokomis.  They 
are here this afternoon visiting our Legislative Building and are 
accompanied by their teacher, Keith Hassman, as well as Joyce Braun, Judy 
Harley, and Doug Edwards.  Would you welcome these students to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Costs of Decentralization 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to direct my question 
to the minister in charge of decentralization.  Mr. Minister, the $2.2 
million under the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation budget for 
decentralization refers only to the head office, and the individual 
departments must find the money in their budgets to pay for their own 
decentralization.  You have a department like Highways which has already 
had a cut of 10 per cent in its budget this year.  Where are they supposed 
to come up with an extra $12 million which is the real cost to finance your 



 

 

political strategy?  Are they supposed to cut services even further, Mr. 
Minister, or are they supposed to increase the deficit?  Which one of those 
is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member begins his question from 
the premise that he's been operating on all along, and that is that as 
these decentralization moves are announced, they're announced out over a 
period of three to four years.  And in each case that's been the case, over 
a period of three to four years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks his questions based on the premise 
that all of the expenditure would be in the current budget year and in the 
current calendar year.  Obviously that won't be the case.  The hon. member 
knows that, but he likes to cloud the issue for his own purposes obviously.  
That's fair ball.  That's the political nature of the debate that he likes 
to enter into.  Mr. Speaker, the costs of each move, the range of costs for 
each individual move that have been announced, are there and have been 
reported in each case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, a cost is a cost.  Whether it is three years or three months, the 
taxpayers are going to have to pay $12 million for your announcement that 
you made yesterday with no visible return whatsoever, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- What we have in today's announcement is that your 
decentralization plans in your estimates will cost $10 million in phoney 
Tory promises, but in real dollars is going to cost now $50 million.  And 
since you claim that the departments are already as lean as they can be, 
just where is this money supposed to come from?  And more to the point, Mr. 
Minister, can you point out where, in any departmental budget, that money 
is to be found?  Can you point that out, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the numbers that we have announced in each 
case are based on the experience that we have had.  He once again begins 
from the premise that there's no experience with decentralization.  There 
is a significant experience with decentralization in the province.  We've 
moved significant corporations from Regina to the communities of Melville 
and Swift Current and other places.  We have seen from that what the costs 
are of moving X number of employees and so much per employee or per 
position.  Those numbers, Mr. Speaker, are there and they have been our 
experience.  It's upon that experience that these numbers are based.  That 
makes eminent sense, Mr. Speaker.  And it's there for all to see. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that is a variable in this is the experience 
of what are the lease costs in communities outside of the capital cities 



 

 

compared to the lease costs inside the capital city.  All of those are 
variables.  Then that's why, because there are some variables involved, is 
why there's a range in each move as they are announced.  There's a range of 
costs, and we stand by what those costs will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they're announced, and as other announcements go forward those 
costs will be laid out as these have been. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, your experience, so called, is one thing, but your estimates by 
your own department have said that the cost of this is going to be $12 
million for the Department of Highways, and will have an incremental, 
annual increase in the cost of operating of $5 million and that can't be 
justified. 
 
Now I'm going to go back to the $2.2 million which you budgeted in the SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) budget, Mr. Minister.  Since 
it's there not to move employees, we would like to know how it's going to 
be divided. 
 
So if you listen, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you this question.  What is 
the cost of the Watrous office and the cost of the office here in downtown 
Regina?  You've got two.  What is the salary being paid to Mr. Art 
Battiste, your decentralization guru located in downtown Regina?  And how 
much has gone for advertising this political program?  Would you provide 
these costs breakdown, Mr. Minister, so that you could further justify what 
you're doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said, the costs that we have 
outlined are the costs . . . expenditures that we believe that this program 
will take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member stands in the House again today, expresses his 
concerns and his opposition to Fair Share Saskatchewan and decentralizing 
to the regions of Saskatchewan.  That member expresses his . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order.  I'm going to ask the 
hon. member for Quill Lakes to refrain from intervening.  I know there are 
from time to time others as well, but the hon. member from Quill Lakes has 
been keeping it up constantly and I ask him to refrain. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- He uses an example, Mr. Speaker, of a report that came 
purportedly from someone in the Department of Highways.  And in that report 
there was a number, $12 million.  I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that number 
included in the Highways' submission that was developed for the government 
a long number of months ago, that included a whole new computer systems 
that the Highways department have been after. 
 
The hon. member, a former Finance minister, knows how these requests come 



 

 

forward to treasury board.  Whole new computer systems for the department.  
Except that the hon. member says that the department in that submission, in 
that particular submission, were including whole new computer systems that 
they have been after,regardless of whether they moved anywhere or whether 
they were staying in Humford House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the costs of this program are the costs of this program, of 
the moves.  And that's what takes place.  The costs of so much, so much per 
employee, so much for lease space -- Mr. Speaker, that member says he's 
against it. 
 
I just have one more point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible for 
the Environment and Public Safety.  Mr. Minister, I have here in my hand a 
copy of the news release of today which announces the uprooting and 
relocation of your department.  Within the news release, Mr. Minister, if 
we could believe your figures -- and that's hard -- you indicate that this 
is going to cost somewhere between 1 and $1.6 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, my questions to you are these.  Of that much money, would you 
tell the people of Saskatchewan today how much you intend to spend on 
relocating staff; how much is to be spent on the leasing or purchasing of 
new accommodation; how much is to be spent on breaking office leases here 
in Regina; how much is to be spent buying new communications equipment; how 
much is to be spent moving office equipment, moving communication 
equipment; how much is to be spent hooking your computers up to a new 
communication network.  And finally, Mr. Minister, how much is set aside to 
provide your travel to and fro? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, once again we have a member of the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) here in Regina standing up and expressing his 
opposition to the decentralization program.  It must be noted . . . another 
member too now, first of all the member who's the critic in this area, the 
former member for Humboldt and Watrous, who's now centralized to Regina, 
then the member from Moose Jaw -- two NDP members stand up and express 
their opposition to decentralization; other members across there have 
expressed their intentions to carry on with decentralization when they're 
outside of Regina, out in the province. 
 
I have here a copy of the Tisdale Recorder, June 10, in there, and let me 
just quote, Mr. Speaker: "For the PC's to say that we would cancel Fair 
Share is an outright lie." 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who said? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Romanow said.  The Leader of the NDP said, oh we won't 
cancel Fair Share, we're for Fair Share, when he's in Tisdale.  But his 
people here stand in the House and they say, we're against Fair Share; 



 

 

we're against stabilizing rural Saskatchewan; we're against those 
communities out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we say the same thing in Regina, difficult as that might be, 
as we say outside of Regina, because we believe strongly in what we're 
doing to stabilize rural Saskatchewan, whether it's this program, the farm 
safety nets, community bonds.  We believe in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- The fact that the minister responsible for the Department 
of Environment and Public Safety would not get on his feet to answer the 
question, the fact that the minister for Fair Share will not answer the 
questions, is proof, Mr. Speaker, proof that there is no cost/benefit 
analysis, proof that they haven't done the work, and proof, Mr. Speaker, 
that this whole scheme is nothing but politics, nothing but a desperate 
attempt to divide our province to get their government re-elected, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister responsible for the 
Department of the Environment to provide us the exact cost breakdown of the 
cost for this decentralization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the announced costs of relocation are 
there in each case . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Excuse me, excuse me.  I'd ask the hon. 
members to allow the minister to continue without undue interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The announced costs are there, as they were this 
morning, for the Department of Environment and Public Safety, other 
departments.  Those costs are there and they're based on the experience 
that we have with other moves, other decentralizations, other cases where 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) said it couldn't work -- other cases where 
members of that caucus said, Crop Insurance can't operate from Melville.  
They said Crop Insurance can't operate from Melville.  Crop Insurance 
operates very, very well for farmers all across this province from 
Melville.  That's what they said then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now they rise, and here's the member from Moose Jaw rising to 
express his opposition to this, just as he expressed in Regina his 
opposition to the fertilizer plant near his own city.  But when he's in 
Moose Jaw, I'm all for the fertilizer plant, he says.  The same thing in 
town as in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct my question to the 



 

 

Minister of Highways and Transportation.  Mr. Minister, yesterday your 
department announced it would decentralize 250 jobs to the Yorkton area at 
a cost of $3.6 million.  Now, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that you are intimate 
with the details of this decentralization and will be able to provide me 
with the cost, Mr. Minister.   
 
Of this amount of 3.6 million, could you tell this Assembly how much is 
spent on relocation costs for staff; how much is spent on leasing or 
purchasing new accommodations; how much is to be spent buffering employees 
against real estate fluctuations and prices; how much for vacant or 
breaking leases in Regina; how much on purchasing new equipment -- 
communications equipment; how much to be spent moving offices and 
communication equipment; and how much is spent in hooking up computers and 
other equipment to the communications network. 
 
And finally, Mr. Minister, from your details of this decentralization, how 
much has been set aside for ministerial and staff travel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the case yesterday, as it was today, the 
announced cost of the move of the Department of Highways and Transportation 
to Yorkton and east-central Saskatchewan was based on the experience that I 
outlined earlier in this question period, the experience we have had. 
 
The specifics the hon. member raises, whether it be computers' hook-up, 
whether it be the lease costs, all of those things were taken into 
consideration, these costs.  The differential between lease costs there and 
lease costs here, all were taken into consideration.  Mr. Speaker, the 
experience we have had with Crop Insurance in Melville, with Agricultural 
Credit Corporation in Swift Current -- both organizations which are very 
highly computerized -- all of those costs are there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say to the hon. member, and as I did to his colleague from Moose Jaw a 
few moments ago, here's another NDP member who's up here and on the record 
as being against Fair Share Saskatchewan when his leader, while in Tisdale, 
which is convenient for Tisdale . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I must hasten to assure the minister in 
charge of decentralization that what I'm against here is this Tory 
decentralization plan.  That's what I'm against. 
 
I would like to, Mr. Speaker, direct this question to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Both sides of the House, order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I would like to be able to direct this question to the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation, but it appears that he's mute 
today and cannot respond. 



 

 

 
In the absence of an answer from the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation, I'd like to hear from the minister in charge of 
decentralization. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Department of Highways and Transportation people are 
telling the media internal studies show that the cost per job will be in 
the range of $50,000 -- not $10,000 per job as you're estimating in your 
news releases, Mr. Minister.  With this kind of discrepancy, Mr. Minister, 
have you a full breakdown of the cost to defend your position?  If not, why 
are you hiding the cost of this Tory decentralization program from the 
people of Saskatchewan?  Who's going to pay the cost of this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, now we have it.  Now the veteran member of 
the NDP over there says it's the Tory decentralization plan.  That's what 
he says.  His candidate yesterday, 24 hours ago in Yorkton, said we're for 
this.  His candidate, their candidate -- we're for this decentralization in 
Yorkton. 
 
The person sitting two seats over to his right from the Quill Lakes, when 
he's in Wynyard and in Watson -- we're for this; we're for this program.  
This is a good program for the rural communities.  This is what these 
communities need.  That's what he says, his other brother behind him over 
here, the Agriculture critic.  He says, oh we're for this when we're in 
Humboldt. 
 
In fact the member from Humboldt said and I quote, on the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio, and I quote:  the voters here may even 
reward the Tories, he says.  I mean the guy . . . every one of their 
members when they leave Regina, take on a different view, whether it's this 
issue, the Weyerhaeuser paper mill, the Gainers plant, the fertilizer 
plant, every diversification project.  They're against every one of them in 
Regina; they're for every one of them in the community affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is an entire entity.  This province must be 
governed as an entire entity.  We believe in the stabilization of this 
province's economy, the rural economy, and they are not for that.  So, Mr. 
Speaker, let them have a plan and what . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- The member from Regina North East -- yes, you can wave your 
arm -- and some others, hollering at the Chair is absolutely 
unparliamentary.  I'm drawing it to your attention.  Nobody's guiltless in 
this House to be hollering at other people and I ask the hon. members to 
remember that.  That is no way to act in this House.  It is most 
unparliamentary. 
 
Next question.  That's enough of that. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister of decentralization talks about 
his experience with respect to calculating costs for decentralization.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you what our experience is.  Our experience 



 

 

and the experience of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, is that 
prior to the election in 1986, this government said the deficit was one 
thing, and after the election they told us they miscalculated it by $800 
million. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Health.  Last week your department 
announced it would decentralize 30 jobs from the drug plan to Davidson at a 
cost of 350,000.  Mr. Minister, of that amount, would you please tell this 
Assembly how much is to be spent on relocation costs for these 30 jobs for 
the staff; how much is to be spent on leasing or purchasing new 
accommodations for the 30 families; how much is to be spent providing 
employees with a buffer against real estate prices; how much is to be spent 
on breaking leases in Regina; how much is to be spent on purchasing new 
communications equipment; how much is to be spent moving office and 
communications equipment; how much is to be . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Now here's a perfect example of why we have problems in 
question period.  The minister is answering the question over here much 
longer than they should.  And here we have a question, quite frankly, which 
would take a long, long time if it was totally answered, and we're not at 
the end of it yet.  So what we need is co-operation on both sides, not 
accusations. 
 
Now I'm going to ask the hon. member for Lakeview to complete her question, 
and for the minister to answer in a reasonable length of time.  I'm going 
to ask that. 
 
Hold it, the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone, are you challenging the 
Chair?  I will conduct this House as I think is right and not a member from 
this House.  The member from Regina Elphinstone, you're going to rise, sir, 
and you're going to apologize for blatantly interfering with the Chair. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, how much is going to be set aside for 
ministerial and staff travel; how much for hooking up computers to a 
communications network?  Mr. Minister, where is your cost analysis?  Will 
you table it today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the announcement as it related to the drug 
plan, it will be located in Davidson, midway between Saskatoon and Regina 
-- a reasonable location for the drug plan to be operating from, a drug 
plan which serves the whole province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the costs that were announced at the time of the drug plan 
move was announced, are the costs that it will take to make that move -- 
350,000, in that range. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, you're minister of decentralization.  You 
should have these costs at your fingertips and a detailed analysis.  Your 
reluctance to produce them means only one thing, and that's because you 
know your analysis will not stand up to public scrutiny. 
 
Mr. Minister, where do you get the nerve to make announcements about a 
policy decision, when we have a $5 billion deficit in this province, 
attaching costs to it that you know won't stand up to public scrutiny? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says, where do you get the 
nerve to deal with a policy like this -- decentralization.  That's what she 
says, the member for Regina.  The member for Regina who once understood the 
nature . . . 
 
 DThe Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- We have the member from Regina Lakeview who once 
understood the nature of rural Saskatchewan saying: where do you get the 
nerve to try to serve and stabilize rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must stand up for rural Saskatchewan.  She makes reference 
to the economy of the province and difficult budget circumstances.  She 
makes reference to all those things.  The very economy that dictates the 
difficulty in the budget is the same economy that dictates the need to 
stabilize rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  If they'd ever make that 
connection, they would all be on the same side on this issue.  Here we have 
people standing up against Fair Share Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Opposition to Decentralization 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  Mr. 
Premier, if we ever needed proof the decentralization plan of yours is 
simply a series of political announcements, today is in fact the day.  Mr. 
Premier, you won't tell us where the money's coming for to pay for this 
ill-conceived program.  You won't tell us how it's going to be spent.  And 
you won't even tell us what all is involved in fact in the spending of 
these tens of millions of dollars. 
 
I have here today, Mr. Premier, a quote from The Edmonton Journal which 
clearly outlines that the Alberta government is backing away from 
decentralization as a result of the outcry from Saskatchewan citizens.  The 
quote, Mr. Speaker, is: the Saskatchewan government has taken a torrent of 
abuse about its decentralization program which has relocated more than 650 
workers to rural communities. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: how is it that the Premier of 



 

 

Alberta is more responsive to the workers of Saskatchewan than you are?  
How is it that Don Getty has more care for Saskatchewan workers than the 
Premier of Saskatchewan?  How does that work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the hon. member 
that he never is really very happy when I refer to Ontario NDP.  He says, 
why don't you talk about Saskatchewan stuff?  So I remind you, Mr. Speaker, 
that now he's looking for some place else to grab on to some sort of 
corner-stone in Fair Share, so he's over in PC (Progressive Conservative) 
Alberta. 
 
I'll say to him, Mr. Speaker, that right here in Saskatchewan, right here 
in Saskatchewan, the former president of the University of Saskatchewan, a 
great guy, Mr. Speaker, who believes in rural Saskatchewan, has said, this 
is the right thing to do, to move the Department of Agriculture, including 
the deputy minister and all of Agriculture, to Humboldt and area. 
 
It's supported by the NDP member from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker.  He said he 
wouldn't change it.  And, Mr. Speaker, in Tisdale the NDP leader in the 
province of Saskatchewan has said: 
 

 "For the PC's to say that we would cancel Fair Share is an outright lie," 
Romanow added. 

 
Now he's for it in the country; he's for in Humboldt; he's for it all over 
the province, Mr. Speaker, and he's against . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

POINTS OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, during the question period today the 
minister in charge of decentralization referred to an internal document in 
the Department of Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that document has been tabled in the 
legislature.  And pursuant to the rules of Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules 
and Forms on page 115, "Documents Cited," rule 327(1), I think it refers 
clearly to the fact that when documents are referred to or cited from, that 
that document has to be tabled. 
 
And I wondered, Mr. Speaker, if you would make a ruling that in fact if the 
minister . . . I suppose I would ask him to table the document -- if he 
refuses, whether the legislature would require him to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, during the question period today, the hon. 
member says that I referred to a document.  I referred to that there were 
series of documents that came to treasury board. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rule as I understand it, is if I was quoting directly from 
a document.  And I didn't cite or quote from the document, Mr. Speaker; I 
made reference to the document. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. I listened to the hon. member's point of order.  And 
in the point of order he raised, he indicated that the minister referred to 
the document.  And Beauchesne's citation 327(3) reads as follows: 
 

 A public document referred to but not cited or quoted by a Minister need 
not be tabled. 

 
The hon. member in a point of order indicated, the way I recall, that the 
minister referred to the document.  However that's the way we call your 
point of order, that you said referred to -- referred to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order.  I noticed that 
during question period the minister cited a document during his answer that 
dealt with an internal document from the Department of Highways.  Having 
cited the document, I wonder if we could require that that document be 
tabled. 
 
The Speaker: -- Well based on your present point of order, you appreciate I 
can't make a ruling on it at this point.  I'll have to take it under 
advisement and I'll have to look at the verbatim. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Before orders of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, you will recall that last Thursday evening on a point of 
privilege when the demonstrators had come to the legislature, the member 
from Regina Centre had asked you to table the document that you were 
reading when you gave your ruling on the procedure that is used in this 
legislature when we have demonstrations and rallies outside of the doors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is now Tuesday.  We've been waiting I believe three sitting 
days for the tabling of the document that you read, for the answers to the 
questions that the member from Regina Centre asked of you.  And I'm 
wondering, Mr. Speaker, when will we receive your response to the questions 
that were asked by the member from Regina Centre. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'll be pleased to answer that question to the hon. member.  
I'm taking some time, of course, because I want a complete answer to the 
question.  And you may be sure that the answer --with relevant document -- 
I almost have it ready and it will be very, very soon that the hon. members 
will receive it.  Very soon. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 7 -- Encouragement of Small Business 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at the end of my 
remarks I will be moving a motion to be seconded by my colleague, the 
member from Wilkie. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, small business plays a very important part in the economy of 
our province.  It is the largest creator of new jobs in Saskatchewan and is 
a major force behind the diversification force that will see us move away 
from being so dependent on agriculture. 
 
Agriculture has faced the problems of drought along with low prices, and 
this had serious effect on our whole province.  I have seen many families 
around the province and I've heard from many farmers in my constituency who 
are really hurting because of this situation in agriculture.  When the 
farmer's short on cash, everybody suffers. 
 
This is why it is so very important that small business be given the 
opportunity to succeed in Saskatchewan, because it is the small-business 
sector that will broaden our economic base and provide a source of hope for 
the future.  This is why it is so important to look to newer ways to 
stimulate small-business sectors -- something that this government has done 
very well. 
 
To prepare for our future we must make sure that the people who want to 
start or continue small business are given every possible chance to do so, 
small-business sector jobs, jobs for now and jobs for the future.  It 
diversifies our economy, and many times brings in innovative ideas and 
improvements to existing products and service.  For this reason alone, we 
must continue to encourage small-business people and business venture in 
this province. 
 
As our economic base begins to shift away from a total dependence on 
agriculture sector, it has become more important that we look to other 
means of making our economy strong.  This is especially true in the rural 
towns and villages which are effected so mostly by these changes. 
 
The people who live in these small communities around the province are 
really concerned with the changes taking place across the province and 
around the world that affects the stability of the town.  And many of them 
are taking charge of developing small business right at home by using 
programs like the community bonds.  They know they can't depend on farming 
alone to make our province strong. 
 
They know that to see our communities strive and prosper, in order to see 
them continue on, there are two main things that must be taken care of 
before.  First of all, we must continue to start behind the farmers of this 
province, to stay behind the farmers of this province.  The long-term 
safety net GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net income 
stabilization account) go a long ways toward this goal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that in my constituency, the GRIP, the 
sign-up, the percentage of signing up in GRIP program, is over 95 per cent 
-- over 95 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  That just prove that finally the farmer 
have a guaranteed income plan, the first time in history.  NISA to me, I 
think it's just like a retirement savings which everybody in this province 
have.  Finally the farmer has the same opportunity. 
 



 

 

And secondly, we must work with the people across the province to find new 
and different ways for them to develop economically.  Since 1982, 
manufacturing investment is up by almost 700 per cent -- Mr. Speaker, 
nearly 700 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, this is even more impressive when you 
consider that the growth occurred during some of the most difficult 
economic times this province has ever faced. 
 
Tourism and the area which is one of the fastest growing industry in our 
province has expanded record-breaking growth since 1988.  That's the year 
tourism inquiries reached an all-time high of more than 178,000 -- an 
increase of 72 per cent since 1988.  Throughout this province, tourism 
gives jobs to about 23,000 people and brings in over $750 million a year 
into our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and we have been involved in other efforts that supported 
Saskatchewan business, like the Buy Saskatchewan Agencies. 
 
Buy Saskatchewan Agencies was started up in 1987 by this government.  It is 
an agency that truly benefitted Saskatchewan businesses and is an effort 
that we can all be proud of.  It has developed our business sector, 
hundreds of millions of new contractors and joint ventures opportunities.  
The agency has encouraged hospitals, school boards, local government and 
businesses to buy from Saskatchewan suppliers whenever possible. 
 
And there's evidence of their success of these agencies, Mr. Speaker.  Buy 
Saskatchewan negotiate with the NewGrade upgrader to create the contracts 
so that Saskatchewan firms would have a chance to bid on them.  That meant 
business for Saskatchewan companies.  Buy Saskatchewan worked with 13 
agriculture implement firms to supply structural steel for the upgrader.  
This meant business for those 13 firms -- 7 million worth of contracts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower buys 90 per cent of everything it needs right here 
at home.  That meant over $283 million for Saskatchewan business last year 
alone.  Business from all over the province have benefitted from the work 
that Buy Saskatchewan Agency has in the past.  And that will continue in 
the future. 
 
I talked very briefly about agriculture earlier.  And I would like to say 
now that farming will always be a major role in the economy of this 
province.  The future of this province lies in promoting those ventures and 
backing those people who will help make our province strong through 
diversifying our economy. 
 
The government has shown its commitment to supporting small business as a 
means to their future, Mr. Speaker.  With that in mind I hereby move the 
following: 
 

 That this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan for its support 
of small business, for its recognition of the important role this sector 
plays in the Saskatchewan economy and for its many programs and measures 
taken by the Department of Economic Development and Tourism, the 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, the Saskatchewan government 



 

 

growth fund, and Buy Saskatchewan Agency and its other departments and 
agencies to assist small business. 

 
I hereby make this motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the motion before us 
today is the most important motion we will debate here this season -- this 
session I should have said.  And I say this because the motion recognizes 
two very important facts.  First that this administration has followed 
strict spending policies which will make government as efficient and 
effective as possible. 
 
And second, that these . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- I think the hon. member for Quill Lakes . . . just refrain.  
He has interfered many times today, and quite frankly I'm tired of hearing 
his interferences even after I call him to order.  I'm asking him once more 
not to interfere. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And second, Mr. Speaker, that 
these restraints must continue so that we can provide the services and 
protection that Saskatchewan needs to face the challenges ahead. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, the government has a plan for 
Saskatchewan.  First, we are protecting and stabilizing agriculture and the 
rural economy through agricultural assistance payments, GRIP and NISA, Fair 
Share Saskatchewan, and community bonds, participating loans and a host of 
other programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next we are helping Saskatchewan people to diversify and build 
an industry throughout the province.  Already, Mr. Speaker, we have 
increased manufacturing in Saskatchewan by $700 million.  We're making 
paper, gasoline, cable, recreation vehicles, fertilizer, natural gas, and 
export hundreds of other products and services that have never been before 
done in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Those are here and that was done by 
this government.  We have just as many resources here as anywhere else in 
Canada.  And under this government, resources are being used to build 
industry, jobs, and the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the government is introducing democratic reforms to make 
government more in tune with what the people have been telling us, Mr. 
Speaker.  Times change, and the democratic system must change with it.  So 
in this session, Mr. Speaker, we are introducing freedom of information 
legislation, plebiscites and referendums, an elected Speaker -- you 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, are evidence of that -- and more power for the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now all of these things we are doing, Mr. Speaker, are not possible unless 
we continue to exercise sensible fiscal restraint measures.  If we squander 



 

 

our money on big, inefficient government, then there will be no money to 
stabilize and protect rural Saskatchewan and to diversify and build our 
industries. 
 
If we take the attitude of the members opposite and try to buy the next 
election with promises we cannot afford, then there would be no future for 
Saskatchewan.  But we have not squandered the money on ridiculous promises, 
Mr. Speaker.  Instead we have set out a clear, rational, fiscal plan that 
will provide efficient, effective government and the resources we need to 
continue to keep on building and protecting the province.  We have done 
that. 
 
Streamlining government payrolls has been a big part of this success, and 
the process.  Since 1982 the government has reduced the size of the civil 
service by over 2,300 positions.  And on this year's budget we have 
eliminated another 352.  Cabinet ministers and legislative secretary 
salaries have been held at the 1989 level.  All severance pay are gone and 
the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) will not get a salary 
increase until the budget is balanced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are some of the measures we are taking.  Government travel has been 
restricted, as has office equipment purchases, and nine departments have 
been eliminated.  Public sector wages have been set at reasonable levels, 
as have operating grants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are also working to improve financial relations with the federal 
government so that in the future we can avoid or at least reduce the 
off-loading of financial responsibilities that Ottawa has engaged for in 
the past few years.  By using . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Excuse me.  Order, order.  The hon. member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake wishes to . . . 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm wondering if I could have the 
indulgence of the House to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you 
and through you to members of the Legislative Assembly, a gentleman from 
the riding of Kinistino, Mr. Armand Roy. 
 
Mr. Roy has decided to seek the nomination for the New Democratic Party and 
was successful in that venture, and I am assuming all members of this House 
will agree has a very good chance of being the next member from Kinistino. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Resolution No. 7 -- Encouragement of Small Business (continued) 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, by 



 

 

using this strategy the province of Saskatchewan will see a balanced budget 
in 1993.  And I want to say that it will be a truly balanced budget, Mr. 
Speaker.  There will be no hidden deficit like there was in 1982 when the 
members opposite were in power.  There will be no $4.9 billion hidden away 
like there was when the NDP left government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This financial plan will make it possible to carry out the overall plan for 
Saskatchewan that I explained earlier, Mr. Speaker.  These fiscal 
restraints will allow us to continue to protect and stabilize rural 
Saskatchewan and promote diversification and growth throughout the 
province. 
 
Now the members opposite of course don't agree with the measures we've 
taken.  They complain when we reduce the size of the public sector and when 
we put restraints on wage increases.  But at the same time they complain 
about the deficit.  As usual the members opposite are flip-flopping on the 
issues, trying to have it both ways. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we ask what is their plan?  I don't hear any plans, Mr. 
Speaker.  Well as I pointed out in my budget speech, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite don't have a plan.  Shades of Ontario.  What they have is 
a string of cruel and empty promises no government could ever keep or 
honour, Mr. Speaker.  They offer carrots to the people of Saskatchewan in 
an attempt to buy the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have written a blank cheque that will cost the people of 
this province over $3 billion in extra taxes each year.  Now I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, how can the members opposite continue to protect Saskatchewan 
people from low prices, droughts, and high interest rates when they have 
bankrupt the province? 
 
Now how can they diversify and build the economy when they have a $3 
billion deficit?  Well the answer of course, Mr. Speaker, is they can't do 
it.  The NDP have no solutions for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  They have no 
idea at all what to do about the problems we face.  At a time when every 
province in the country is cutting back, the members opposite are promising 
a $3 billion deficit per year, Mr. Speaker.  At a time when people want 
sensible alternatives, the NDP are avoiding the issues and trying to buy 
votes with the promises they can never, never keep.  They can't be kept. 
 
This province, this government offers the sort of sensible solutions 
Saskatchewan people are demanding.  By following the fiscal restraint plan 
that we have laid out, the deficit will be steadily reduced.  In the coming 
year the deficit will be $265 million, $100 million lower than last year's.  
In 1992-93 the deficit will be decreased again, Mr. Speaker, to $150 
million.  And in 1993-94 Saskatchewan will have a balanced budget. 
 
That is the goal of the fiscal restraints the government has followed for 
the past several years, Mr. Speaker, to balance the budget in 1993.  And of 
course, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite scoff at it and laugh at it.  But 
we do have a plan.  We have a goal.  We have an object.  We have something 
we want to do.  I suppose, Mr. Speaker, they would rather us promise 
another $3 billion of spending like they're doing -- promises you can't 



 

 

keep.  But if you look at this government's fiscal record with an unbiased 
eye, Mr. Speaker, you will see that we have done very well. 
 
For almost 10 years the province has suffered repeated droughts, low grain, 
uranium, potash, and oil prices, and very high interest rates.  Mr. 
Speaker, we did not sit idly by and let Saskatchewan be ruined.  We put the 
treasury on the line, Mr. Speaker, and that was to protect farmers, 
business people, home owners, health care, education, and the Saskatchewan 
way of life.  Yes we did.  We put the treasury on the line.  The Premier 
said he would and he did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after all that, Saskatchewan's debt per person is still the 
fourth lowest in Canada.  Now they laugh, Mr. Speaker.  The facts are 
there, the fourth lowest in Canada, and this is after 10 years of very 
tough going, Mr. Speaker.  I'll tell you what.  Only Prince Edward Island, 
British Columbia, and Alberta have done a better job of balancing the 
books.  That is an incredible achievement, Mr. Speaker -- incredible. 
 
By following a sensible fiscal plan from the very beginning, we have kept 
our level of debt per person the fourth lowest in Canada -- fourth lowest.  
Mr. Speaker, we knew we had to protect Saskatchewan people and help them 
build the province, but we also knew we had to keep a tight hold on the 
debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1987 the civil service was reduced by 2,000 positions.  
Employee wages were frozen at 1986-87 levels for two years.  A hundred and 
four programs were ended and another 72 down-sized, and 14 government 
departments were given no increase in the budget. 
 
In 1988-89, spending was reduced in 11 departments and agencies. 
 
In 1989-90, 12 government departments were held to a zero per cent increase 
or had their budgets reduced.  And as I mentioned earlier, cabinet minister 
and legislative secretaries were frozen. 
 
In 1990-91, four departments were combined into one and three others were 
eliminated.  Funding for 21 government departments was frozen or reduced, 
and several programs like the home program and the fuel rebate program were 
either eliminated or reduced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now of course we have the spending restraints introduced in the present 
budget, which I have already gone over. 
 
None of these choices were easy to make, Mr. Speaker.  Spending cuts are 
never easy to make, never popular with the people.  But if we did not have 
the courage to make these changes, Saskatchewan would be in a very, very 
bad shape today.  We would not have the fourth lowest level of net debt per 
person in Canada; we would probably have the highest.  And we could not 
continue to plan to protect and build Saskatchewan either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I know the government's plan for Saskatchewan has been described many 
times and . . . already in the House many times.  But I'm going to say it 
again so that the members opposite can catch a glimpse of what a plan looks 



 

 

like.  Perhaps they could come up with one or two of their own.  I very 
much doubt if they will, Mr. Speaker, because they have yet to present 
Saskatchewan people with a single, viable alternative for the challenges we 
face. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, the government is committed to protecting agriculture.  
In one way or another, agriculture influences almost every job in the 
province.  Without farmers Saskatchewan would have no economy. 
 
(1500) 
 
Second, we are committed to stabilizing rural Saskatchewan as a whole.  
Through programs like Fair Share, agricultural assistance, and community 
bonds, we are helping Saskatchewan people to protect their towns and 
villages throughout the province. 
 
Third, we are stimulating investment, innovation, and economic growth in 
all of our industries across the province.  SEDCO, participating loans and 
small business loans associations, community bonds, Buy Saskatchewan, and 
many other programs have indeed helped increase manufacturing investment in 
the province by over 700 per cent. 
 
Through Buy Saskatchewan we have helped Saskatchewan business secure over 
253 million in contracts.  Through SEDCO alone we have created over 2,600 
jobs and maintained 3,600 more.  Through the youth entrepreneurial program, 
we have created 460 new jobs. 
 
And what is really exciting about this increased investment and these new 
jobs is that they are happening in industries that are new to Saskatchewan 
-- new industries that are helping us move away from our heavy reliance on 
simply exporting natural resources -- goods jobs with a solid future, 
making paper, gasoline, or processing food or making fertilizer. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the government's plan for Saskatchewan includes 
reforming our democratic system.  We are making changes like referendums 
and plebiscites that will bring government closer to the people -- reforms 
that are changing with the people of Saskatchewan so that our government 
system continues to serve their needs and expectations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, none of these measures I have described would be possible 
without the careful fiscal restraint plan the government has followed.  
Without money, we cannot do the things that must be done to protect our 
future.  We cannot protect health care or education as we have done in the 
past, and we cannot protect and stabilize rural Saskatchewan and promote 
economic diversification and growth. 
 
The spending restraints the government has followed up until now and the 
added restraints contained within the budget are not easy choices to make, 
Mr. Speaker.  But they are necessary.  And I congratulate the Minister of 
Finance on his courage and dedication to Saskatchewan's future.  With these 
economic restraints and with the government's plan for all Saskatchewan, 
the province will continue to grow and prosper for years to come. 
 



 

 

Unlike the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, the government offers 
Saskatchewan a plan that would work, a plan that will secure the future for 
themselves and their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to second the motion and I thank you for your 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
indicate at the outset of my remarks that I intend to move an amendment to 
this motion. It will be seconded by the member from The Battlefords.  And I 
will read that into the record at the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm a little in awe after hearing the member from Wilkie, 
having watched closely what's happened in this province since 1982, since 
this government took over.  And I just want to talk a little bit about the 
effects on small business, the effects on working people.  But first of 
all, sir, I want to recap what the member from Wilkie spoke to, or what he 
was speaking about. 
 
I heard phrases when he was referring and describing his government, like, 
spending restraint and fiscal restraint  
 Dand strict spending policies, squandering money -- that they weren't 
doing.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the record of this government, sir, is that 
those phrases are not in fact what this government has done since 1982.  
Because we haven't seen fiscal restraint.  We haven't seen spending 
restraint.  But we have indeed, sir, seen an awful lot of squandering of 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has raised the level of per capita debt to 
something in the neighbourhood of $15,000 for each man, woman, and child in 
our province.  And this member, sir, has the gall to stand before members 
of this legislature, televised throughout this province, and tell the 
people that they have delivered responsible government.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
there isn't a document, there isn't a record, there isn't one economic 
indicator that would show that to be the case. 
 
And I challenge that member, Mr. Speaker, if he can produce a document to 
show that this PC government has been delivering sound, fiscal management, 
I'd like to see him table it because you see, sir, when I look at the 
annual budget reports and the forecasted deficits, it tells me that that is 
not in fact the case.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to come back to this, but I 
want to move on to some of the other comments made by the member from 
Wilkie. 
 
He talks about democratic reform, and he talks about the introduction of 
freedom of information legislation, and so let's review the record.  At a 
time when he talks about more open government and freedom of information, 
we've sat in this legislature for weeks -- for weeks, sir, where this 
government will not call the Crown Corporations Committee where we can 
review the expenditures of Crown corporations in which this government has 



 

 

amassed a debt of some $9 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is openness and if this is freedom of information, why 
then do members on that side of the House refuse to call Crown 
Corporations? Why do they refuse to call Crown Corporations so that we can 
review the expenditures, Mr. Speaker?  Why is this happening? 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when they're going to the people of this province 
and of the business community of Saskatchewan and asking for an increased 
tax load of $440 million, a Bill that they just passed that will allow that 
to happen, and asking those people to pay that, they won't become 
accountable for the $9 billion debt that they've built in Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the history of this legislature under the former 
administration was that Crown corporation estimates ran concurrent with the 
sitting of this legislature.  I've been here since 1986, and I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, it hasn't happened one year since I've been here. 
 
We have goaded and pleaded and written letters and asked the chairman of 
that Crown Corporations Committee every year that I've been here.  We have 
had to ask them to call Crown Corporations.  And they've been refusing and 
dragging their feet, and this member from Wilkie stands up and applauds his 
government for introducing freedom of information legislation.  Mr. 
Speaker, what hypocrisy.  It doesn't ring true with the facts. 
 
The facts are, sir, that the Provincial Auditor of this province has not 
had the chance to review in detail a vast majority of the expenditures of 
this government every year and has complained publicly about it. 
 
And this member stands in his place and expects the people of this province 
to believe that in fact they are pursuing more open government.  What a 
joke.  What a joke, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
just finished tabling a few days ago, petitions asking this government to 
pull back their decision to implement the provincial goods and services 
tax. 
 
This member today stands and talks about democratic reform and about 
plebiscites and how they are so open to having the people, through 
plebiscite, determine the direction of government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how many thousands of people would have to sign these 
petitions to make this government listen?  Are 123,000 names not enough?  
Over 10 per cent of our population, sir, indicated in no uncertain terms 
that they opposed the imposition of the provincial goods and services tax 
-- 123,000 citizens, sir.  And this member stands in his place and talks 
about plebiscites and this new open PC government led by this Premier. 
 
In the dying days of this government, this government lays in its death 
throes, this member stands before the people of Saskatchewan asking them to 
believe that now they've repented and they're listening, when just short 
days ago they ignored the names of 123,000 people who were opposing a tax 
that will destroy many small businesses in our province. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I say shame on that member from Wilkie.  I say shame on him.  
He should be honest with the people of Saskatchewan.  He should be honest 
with members of this legislature.  And he should tell them what the real 
truth is. 
 
He should say that in spite of the fact that a number of caucus members on 
our side of the House didn't support the imposition of the provincial goods 
and services tax, we're continuing on course.  Because the Finance minister 
told us that's how it's happening, the Premier told us that's how it's 
happening, and the House Leader, the Government House Leader told us that's 
what's going to happen. 
 
In spite of the fact that they know it's the most politically destructive 
thing that could happen to them as members of the legislature, in spite of 
that, sir, they chose to ignore 123,000 names on those petitions.  And at 
the same time he stands here and talks about plebiscites and how they're 
listening now.  What folly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has clearly demonstrated itself to be one of 
the most deceitful governments, sir, that has ever been elected to any 
legislature in this country, and the speech by the member from Wilkie 
proves it.  It confirms it for every person in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member talks about balanced budgets legislation.  Can you 
imagine, can you just imagine this member who stood in his place and has 
for nine years voted on every government motion with the government, who 
has supported every deficit budget, and there's been 10 of them now -- this 
man has the audacity, the unmitigated gall to stand before the people of 
this province and talk, even mouth the words, balanced budget. 
 
This sanctimonious member from Wilkie that stands before the people of this 
province and indicates that he favours balanced budgets and balanced budget 
legislation, after what his Premier, what his cabinet, and what his caucus 
have done to the people of this province, I say, Mr. Speaker, shame on that 
member, shame on that cabinet, and shame on that Premier.  They should be 
thrown out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, we're looking at a total provincial debt 
of over $14 billion -- the majority of it, the vast majority of it caused 
by mismanagement and caused by what many people in this province feel is a 
very corrupt government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say that the people of this province see through this 
member.  They see right through the member from Wilkie; they see through 
his Premier.  They see them for what they are, sir.  The height of 
hypocrisy that this member who has been part and parcel of building the 
highest per capita debt that the people of this province have ever seen, 
and he stands in here and even has the gall to mouth the words, balanced 
budget. 
 



 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's why this government has no credibility with small 
business or with farmers or with working men and women.  That's why they've 
got no credibility with the aboriginal community.  That's why, sir, rural 
and urban Saskatchewan are going to band together to get rid of this 
government whenever they call the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to continue on with some of 
the remarks and I want to respond to some of the remarks by the member from 
Wilkie.  He accuses members of the opposition for attempting to buy this 
election.  Well, Mr. Speaker, what have members of the opposition said?  
What have we said? 
 
Let me just give you a quick condensation, sir.  We've said that this 
government has over doubled their revenue since 1982.  And we've said that 
government has to live within their limits, within their means.  And we've 
said that you don't need the new provincial goods and services tax, that 
$4.5 billion, which is what the revenue will be for this year, we 
understand, is enough to run this province and we're committed to that, 
sir. 
 
And if that's an election promise and if that's trying to buy the people of 
this province's votes, well then I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I'll support it 
because we say they've been taxed enough.  And enough is enough and we're 
not going to do it any more.  We're not going to allow you to do it any 
more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- And, Mr. Speaker, how else have members on this side of 
the House tried to buy votes?  How have we tried to buy the votes of the 
business community in Saskatchewan?  Do you know how we've tried to buy 
their vote?  We've offered them fair and open tendering which is what they 
haven't seen since 1982.  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we don't feel bad 
about buying votes in that manner.  We don't feel the least little 
embarrassed about offering open and fair tendering where all Saskatchewan 
business people have a chance to participate.  We don't apologize for that. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, members on that side of the House can 
stand up and rave and rant and chant as much as they want, but I tell you 
those kinds of things to buy people's votes will never embarrass members on 
this side of the House.  I want to tell you that, and I want to tell 
members of this House that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- What else have we promised them, Mr. Speaker?  We've 
promised them some competent government, which is something that they 
haven't seen.  We've made a commitment that we will stop wasting money as 
this government, this administration, has done through patronage.  We've 



 

 

promised, sir, that we will start making government accountable so that 
people in this province know exactly how their tax dollars are spent, by 
opening the books as soon as we're elected. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Wilkie feels that that's 
buying votes, well let me tell you, sir, I would suggest to you that what 
the members of the New Democratic Party have to sell will be bought by the 
vast majority of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I'm telling you, Mr. Speaker, members on this side 
of the House haven't tried to buy their votes by creating a split between 
urban and rural Saskatchewan.  What we've promised and how we've tried to 
buy the hearts and the votes of the people of this province is by promising 
all people of this province fairness. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if fair government and honest government is 
buying votes, well then count me in.  And I tell you what, Mr. Speaker, 
count in the vast majority of the small-business community, count in the 
vast majority of the aboriginal people in this province, count in the vast 
majority of the tradespeople in this province, and count in, sir, the vast 
majority of the farmers in rural Saskatchewan who have had enough of this 
government's hypocrisy, enough of this incompetence, and enough of the 
waste and mismanagement that's gone on. 
 
People of this province want for an election promise and the way you can 
buy their votes -- and I tell members on this side -- on that side of the 
House is to be fair with the people of Saskatchewan, unite them behind a 
fair, honest government as opposed to what this Premier's been delivering 
since 1982.  That's how you buy votes in this province and that's how you 
buy votes in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to what the member from 
Wilkie referred to as a hidden debt that was inherited by this government 
in 1982.  There's no doubt that this government owed money.  We did owe 
some money. We owed a couple of billion dollars, a little more.  But you 
want to know something, Mr. Speaker?  That was self-liquidating debt.  That 
was debt that would have and could have been paid back by the Crowns if the 
administration of this province had been competent, which it hasn't been 
since 1982. That debt would have looked after itself.  And I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, in reference to debt that the member from Wilkie referred to, 
that they've taken that small debt and they've built it to over $14 
billion, almost $15,000 for every man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan. 
 
But, sir, is that debt a self-liquidating debt, one that will be paid off 
by the profits from Crown corporations?  Well at one time prior to this 
government, this administration, that could have happened.  But I tell you 
it can't now.  Because this government has sold or broken apart or 
destroyed every Crown corporation that had the ability to return revenue to 
this province. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, that's the legacy that the member from Wilkie and his cohorts 
have left the people of Saskatchewan.  That's what they've left.  That's 
the fair share that the people of Saskatchewan got, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about fair share we can go through the 
list of who got a fair share and who didn't get a fair share prior to the 
election promises now that this government is making. 
 
I'll tell you, Chuck Childers, the chairman of the Potash Corporation, got 
his fair share.  He got his fair share and a little more -- $745,000 a year 
in a no-cut contract, a contract that can't be broken for almost any 
reason. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, who else got his fair share.  The 
small-business community never did.  But I tell you, George Hill, the 
chairman of the Power Corporation of Saskatchewan, got his fair share in 
the last nine years. 
 
And I want to tell you, Main Street businesses in Humboldt and Watrous and 
Kinistino and Tisdale and every other community that you can name never got 
their fair share.  But I'll tell you who your friends did.  Your friends 
Weyerhaeuser and your friends Cargill got their fair share, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And every member on that side of the House, every PC member, supported 
every move that the government made.  Not one of them, sir, had the courage 
to stand up and say this isn't right.  They never had the courage to say, 
support my neighbours and support my constituents over the wishes and the 
wills of the Weyerhaeusers of this world. 
 
And I want to make a prediction today, Mr. Speaker, speaking of 
Weyerhaeuser.  I'm going to make you a prediction, sir, that Weyerhaeuser 
has no intention of ever paying the people of this province $239 million on 
the principal of that pulp mill.  And you can send it, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 
Minister, you send it.  You send it, Mr. Member.  You send it and I'll tell 
you what, I'll mail it back to you in a few months because I'll prove it to 
be true. 
 
But what they did, sir, they ignored their friends and their neighbours.  
They ignored their constituents, the business community of Saskatchewan, in 
favour of George Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington.  That's the legacy 
that they have left, sir, and that's the fair share. 
 
They've got almost $400 million to put at risk for Cargill Grain 
corporation, Mr. Speaker.  But what have they got for the hoteliers in 
rural Saskatchewan who are going bankrupt?  And I want to say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, a major hotel in the Premier's own riding, I understand, closed 
its doors yesterday.  One in a long list of a number.  And what kind of 
help has this government delivered? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- The member opposite says, why.  I'll tell you why, sir.  



 

 

Because you've done nothing with respect to cross-border shopping.  You've 
done nothing for the people, the business community, to keep them buying 
here in Saskatchewan.  What you've done is you've sent Eric Berntson to 
Ottawa to support the federal goods and services tax, which is putting a 
lot of them out of business, and then, sir, you compounded that with the 
provincial goods and services tax that you've just passed.  That's what 
you've done.  That's where you're coming from. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, members on that side of the House will pay and 
they will pay dearly when an election comes.  Mr. Speaker, this government 
is led blindly, I say, by a Premier who is so out of touch with 
Saskatchewan people that the polls are indicating clearly that the vast 
majority of people in this province could not and would not support him. 
 
And the member from Wilkie, in spite of the fact that Decima releases a 
poll the other day indicating that 63 per cent of the people of this 
province support the New Democratic Party, and the Conservative Party in 
Saskatchewan is down at the bottom of the barrel, will they change their 
direction, Mr. Speaker?  The answer is no, and it's confirmed by the speech 
from the member from Wilkie. 
 
The answer is they're not listening and they don't care.  Because in spite 
of the fact that everyone in this province knows that there has been a 
litany of mismanagement, and that there hasn't been fiscal restraint, and 
that there has been loose spending policies, and that this government has 
been squandering money, the member from Wilkie indicates that that just 
hasn't been the case.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, with the odd 
exception of the members of this legislature and a few of their close, 
political hacks, nobody believes them.  Nobody believes them, sir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to the reasons I'm proposing an amendment to 
the motion.  This government has no right, they have no right, sir, to 
approve the things that they've done and to pat themselves on the back for 
the destruction of many small-business men and women in Saskatchewan.  They 
have no right.  The people of this province know that, Mr. Speaker.  And as 
I said, other than with the exception of a few members on that side of the 
House, no one believes them. 
 
You ask the business community in Saskatchewan what's happened with respect 
to their input costs since 1982, and you're going to get a uniform answer, 
Mr. Speaker, because there is only one answer.  They've increased to the 
point where the bottom line has disappeared for many of those business 
people.  You ask them, sir, whether municipal taxes have increased because 
of revenue down-loading or revenue cut-backs to municipal governments.  You 
ask any business person in urban or rural Saskatchewan whether their taxes 
have increased dramatically since 1982.  And, Mr. Speaker, the answer 
invariably will be yes. 
 
You ask them, Mr. Speaker, if their power and if their gas bills have 
increased, and the answer will be yes.  And, Mr. Speaker, if you want to 
talk about fiscal responsibility and squandering money, ask the business 
men and women of Saskatchewan how they feel when they receive every month 
two envelopes, two invoices sent by two different bureaucracies to tell 



 

 

them, sir, how much their power bill is.  And you ask them, sir, if that's 
fiscal restraint and if that's sound economics that this government should 
be sending two invoices, two letters, two bills, by two separate entities 
for one particular service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two-bill Hill has done his job.  He's padded his pocket, 
embarked upon a move to privatize one of our best Crown corporations, I 
would suggest, the Sask Power Corporation.  And in the process, sir, he 
couldn't ram it through this legislature because the people of Saskatchewan 
stopped it.  The people of Saskatchewan supported the New Democrats when we 
rang the bells for 17 days and walked out and said enough is enough and 
it's not going to happen. 
 
Two-bill Hill, George Hill, Mr. Speaker, was half-way through splitting 
this corporation.  And the business people in Saskatchewan know the fiscal 
folly of receiving those two bills every month.  They know the increased 
costs, and they know that that's added to the costs of their power bills, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they know that the imposition of the federal goods and 
services tax, that the former deputy premier of this province went to 
Ottawa to support, has chased many customers from their places of business.  
They know that, sir.  Because you see, they see that -- they see that in 
every month end when they go to their accountant, or if they're doing their 
own and they're small businesses, they see how much their gross has 
decreased. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, that's why there's no longer in the business 
community support for this government.  And that's one of the reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, this government is going to be so soundly defeated after the next 
election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they know . . . 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to introduce some guests 
that have just arrived in your gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1530) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, a group of 49 grade 4 
students from Dr. Brass School in Yorkton, and we welcome them to the 
Assembly today.  We hope you enjoy your visit and your tour of the Assembly 
in Regina.  And we hope that what you will see over the next few minutes 
will be educational and informative as well. 
 
I'll be meeting with you shortly after to have photos taken and to have 
some refreshments with you, and hopefully to answer any questions that you 
may have about what you've seen here in the Assembly today. 
 



 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome 
these students from Dr. Brass School in Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
welcome the students to the legislature.  We always enjoy having young 
people in the gallery to watch the proceedings.  This is their building.  
This is their legislature, and hopefully some of them will be joining their 
fellow students in this legislature, governing this province in some future 
date. 
 

Resolution No. 7 -- Encouragement of Small Business (continued) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a few more comments to make with 
respect to this motion and to indicate why I suggest that this motion is 
inappropriate and why this government has no right to condone their 
actions.  I just want to refer to what's happened in Saskatchewan in 1990. 
 
The total bankruptcies, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan in 1990 were some 
1,957 bankruptcies, up 329 per cent from the year before.  And of those 
1,957 bankruptcies there were casualties of around 616 businesses, and 
that's an increase of 280 per cent from the year before.  So I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Wilkie has done a hypocritical act by standing 
in this legislature and condoning the waste and mismanagement of a wasteful 
government. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, there are other economic indicators that show this 
government doesn't deserve to be in place any longer.  Last year we saw a 
decrease in retail sales of 1.6 per cent.  Now, Mr. Speaker, the business 
community in this province know that that's the case because, as I said, 
when they go to their accountants and when they do their income tax they 
know what's happened to their bottom line. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this isn't just urban Saskatchewan; it's rural 
Saskatchewan.  And there's more.  We've seen the closure of 60 rural post 
offices in the last while which is going to destroy these towns.  And I 
say, when they've done nothing to stop that, when they've done nothing to 
disallow Brian Mulroney from closing post offices in these rural 
communities, and then they embark upon the decentralization of jobs from 
Regina, I say those are the acts of a hypocritical government. 
 
On one hand they say nothing. When rural towns are looking at the closure 
of their post offices which may in fact destroy them, they're saying 
nothing. 
 
And on the other hand, they start their pre-election hype.  And Fair Share 
Saskatchewan is nothing more, sir, than pre-election hype, because I don't 
believe that they intend to carry through with it if they do form 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this government has no right to 
talk about their record of fiscal responsibility because they haven't got a 



 

 

record of fiscal responsibility.  They have no right to talk about openness 
of government because that's not been their record and that's not been 
their litany. 
 
They have no right to talk about freedom of information legislation when 
they sit on half of the expenditures and disallow the Provincial Auditor 
from looking into the books of this province.  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 
they have no right.  They have no right to govern.  And the people of this 
province, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, support me in that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have no right to speak about balanced budget legislation.  
I mean can you believe it?  Can you believe a government that has delivered 
10 consecutive deficit budgets, that has the audacity to present the idea 
of introducing legislation that would prohibit balanced budgets.  I mean 
does it make any sense, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Where have members of this legislature been?  What do you think the IQ of 
the people of this province is?  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and members 
opposite, that the people know better.  They know what you are.  They know 
who you are.  And they know why you have to be defeated.  They know all of 
that. 
 
And it matters no longer what you do to try and cover your hides.  It's not 
going to happen.  You people have bared the real PC party.  You have bared 
to the people of Saskatchewan the true right wing agenda.  People of 
Saskatchewan not only know that you're incompetent, they not only know that 
you're incompetent, sir, they know what's in your hearts with respect to 
the future of this province. 
 
And I say to you, go to the people of Saskatchewan.  The member from 
Kelvington-Wadena asks if we have a plan, and I just outlined the plan if 
he'd been listening a while earlier.  The plan is fairness, competence, 
spending within the four and a half billion dollars that is raised in this 
province every year -- that's part of the plan. 
 
And you, sir, I'm sorry, will have to wait for explicit details in other 
areas because of time constraints.  I want some of my other colleagues to 
say a few words today. 
 
But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
wants to see the plan, what he should do is walk to the front and centre 
and ask the Premier of this province to call an election.  Because I tell 
you, Mr. Member, you'll see a plan.  You'll see a plan that's built around 
the wishes and the desires of the people of this province, that's built on 
fairness, that's built on competence, and that's built on the realization 
that we've got to work together in this province, urban and rural, if we're 
going to have a future in this province.  That's what you'll see, Mr. 
Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I indicated earlier that there were other 
members who would like to speak to this motion.  And I know my seconder, 



 

 

the member from The Battlefords, is quite interested in getting into the 
debate on this particular motion.  But, Mr. Speaker, I want to read in . . 
. firstly I think it would be fair to read the motion so that people will 
understand the motion, and then I will read my amendment. 
 

 That this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan (this is the 
motion) for its support of small business, for its recognition of the 
important role this sector plays in the Saskatchewan economy, and for its 
many programs and measures taken by the Department of Economic Development 
and Tourism, the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, the 
Saskatchewan government growth fund, the Buy Saskatchewan Agency, and its 
other departments and agencies to assist small business. 

 
Well, sir, I'm moving an amendment and the amendment is as follows: 
 

 That all the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 condemns the government for failing to support small business and for 

imposing an immense tax burden on Saskatchewan consumers which has 
resulted in a dramatic decline in retail sales and an unprecedented number 
of small-business bankruptcies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that amendment more accurately reflects what has 
transpired in Saskatchewan since 1982.  And I know that my colleague, the 
member from The Battlefords, agrees with me, as he has agreed to second 
this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
 DMr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to add a few words to 
my seconding of the amendment by the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
and that the Assembly condemn the government for its failing to support 
small business and for imposing an immense tax burden on Saskatchewan 
consumers which has resulted in a dramatic decline in retail sales and 
unprecedented number of small-business bankruptcies. 
 
And before I speak to the motion and the amendment -- and I'll be speaking 
to those concurrent -- I'd like to respond to some of the comments made by 
the government members opposite who have added some comments that are maybe 
not on track, but nevertheless made those comments, and I want to respond 
to them. 
 
And one of those has to do with Fair Share Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
There were some comments by the member from Kinistino and also the member 
from Wilkie in regard to the good job that Fair Share Saskatchewan is doing 
for Saskatchewan people and for the rural economy of Saskatchewan, 
therefore to small businesses as well I would suppose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is not decentralization.  Fair 
Share Saskatchewan should not be supported and is not supported by the 
majority of Saskatchewan people I would submit to you.  Fair Share 
Saskatchewan is not decentralization.  What Fair Share Saskatchewan is, is 



 

 

forced relocation of hundreds of public employees in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  It has nothing to do with decentralization.  The member from 
Rosthern asked, am I against Fair Share Saskatchewan?  Yes, I am opposed to 
Fair Share Saskatchewan. 
 
The Tory style Fair Share Saskatchewan should be condemned in all corners 
of the province because, as I said, it is not decentralization; it is 
forced relocation.  It would be no different than sending people to salt 
mines in Siberia than what this government is doing to some of their 
employees.  It would be no different than putting the people of dominated 
countries of the world, forcing them to labour in places where they do not 
wish to labour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Did the NDP support decentralization?  Yes, the NDP has always supported 
decentralization in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me give you some examples of that, Mr. Speaker, where it was good for 
small business in Saskatchewan, it was good for Saskatchewan people -- 
examples like the Department of Northern Saskatchewan.  Was the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan an example of decentralization?  Yes it was.  Yes 
it was an example of decentralization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hundreds of people in northern Saskatchewan had economic benefit from the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan.  Many northern native people had 
benefits from the Department of Northern Saskatchewan.  People worked.  
People had economic opportunity.  There were examples of great economic 
diversification and decentralization in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was a minister from the North that was the minister in charge of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan.  That's an example of 
decentralization, Mr. Speaker, and it was much fairer than what they call 
Fair Share Saskatchewan today, their forced relocation of sending people to 
places they don't want to go and deceiving Saskatchewan people by thinking 
they're going to get jobs from government departments in their home 
communities. 
 
But there are no jobs that go with Fair Share Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
There are no jobs that go with Fair Share Saskatchewan.  It's a 
dislocation, a relocation of employees from one area of the province to 
another area of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if the member from Rosthern . . . 
 
(1545) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  The 
member from Rosthern, that's enough.  And I would ask the hon. member from 
Battlefords not to refer to other members using the term he just did.  That 
is far from proper decorum and far from the proper language we wish to use 
in this House. 
 
Order.  The member from Quill Lakes, and I am telling you this for the last 
time, you are once more interfering with the Chair.  Quite frankly I don't 



 

 

know if you deserve, after the many times I've had to interfere and call 
you to order, if you deserve the opportunity to apologize.  But I'm going 
to give you the opportunity to apologize for interfering with the Chair, 
and if you don't, you will be named. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I am not speaking to you, sir.  I am not 
speaking to you, sir. 
 
Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order.  There are 
members at different times who intervene and it's not acceptable. 
 
I spoke to the hon. member from Quill Lakes earlier today.  I'm going to 
give him the opportunity to apologize. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Thank you. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Now the member from Saskatoon South, you neither 
have the right to interfere with the conduct of the Chair.  And I am 
telling you, sir, that I am now giving you the opportunity to apologize. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Sure, I'll apologize to you any time, but be fair. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I am going to give you the opportunity . . . I am 
telling you that if you are challenging the Chair from your desk, you will 
be named.  You will be named.  Now I'm going to give you that opportunity 
to apologize. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I apologize to you, sir. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Are we under way again, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: -- I hope so, sir. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And thank you, sir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've given the example of a reasonable decentralization. That 
was the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to give you another example, Mr. Speaker, of where the New Democrats 
support decentralization.  I can give the example of Saskatchewan Forest 
Products in Prince Albert.  What did this government do with Saskatchewan 
Forest Products in Prince Albert?  They shut it down, sent the employees 
away, and now they say they're sending employees back to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What a cruel and unusual punishment they try and inflict upon the people of 
Saskatchewan, saying that Fair Share Saskatchewan is decentralization.  



 

 

It's no such thing.  Fair Share Saskatchewan is a disintegration of the 
Saskatchewan community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Saskatchewan Forest Products made sense in Prince Albert, 
Mr. Speaker.  No one had to be dislocated; no one had to be relocated.  And 
the forestry industry was centred out of Prince Albert to a large extent, 
Mr. Speaker.  That type of decentralization makes sense.  It makes sense. 
 
What about the dental program, Mr. Speaker?  There were hundreds of dental 
therapists spread out through virtually every community and at least 
serviced every school in the province of Saskatchewan.  That was 
decentralization, Mr. Speaker.  No one had to be relocated.  There wasn't 
dislocation of families and employees.  That was decentralization.  There 
were new opportunities for Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And new services that had not been offered in many, many of 
those communities before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what do we have?  We have a government that wants to rip up people's 
roots, bust up their families, and inflict a false message to other 
communities in Saskatchewan to think they're getting something but they 
really aren't.  They really aren't getting anything, Mr. Speaker.  It's not 
happening.  It's the political agenda of this cruel and unusual government 
that we have before the Saskatchewan people.  And they'll have to come to 
account for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What did they do with the dental program in Saskatchewan, that 
decentralized program, Mr. Speaker?  They abolished it.  They removed all 
those people from Saskatchewan communities.  And now they say they're going 
to relocate other departments and agencies out in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
At what cost?  At what cost to relocate all these government departments 
and agencies?  At what cost to abolish a dental program of which these 
people still have dental equipment sitting in warehouses, Mr. Speaker, 
sitting there to collect rust and mould and moss on the dental equipment.  
And that service is no longer provided to those Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Shame on this government.  Shame on this punishment they inflict on 
Saskatchewan people.  Higher taxation to move forward with their political 
agenda.  What a cruel and unusual thing they do, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Saskatchewan community. 
 
You want more examples of decentralization?  What about the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  One of the greatest moves of 
decentralization with a large economic clout to it.  Potash mines all over 
the potash belt that belonged to Saskatchewan people, that brought in 
revenue to the province of Saskatchewan, run by Saskatchewan men and women 



 

 

trained in the province of Saskatchewan in the way of life that we 
appreciated and they appreciated. 
 
The head office in Saskatoon.  The president of the Potash Corporation born 
in Saskatchewan.  Saskatchewan pride, Mr. Speaker, in a sense of 
Saskatchewan community for Saskatchewan people.  To give consideration to 
the creation of wealth so that programs could be delivered in a responsible 
manner, Mr. Speaker, with due regard for the economy and due regard for the 
taxpayers' dollars. 
 
What about the examples of decentralization in smaller Saskatchewan 
communities?  What about the Water Corporation office in the town of 
Watrous?  What happened to the Water Corporation office in the town of 
Watrous?  You know what they did?  They closed it down, Mr. Speaker.  They 
centralized the Water Corporation, Mr. Speaker.  They closed down new 
offices in different places in the province and centralized the Water 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker, is what they did.  They removed employees from 
those little communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
And now what do they say?  We want you to have your fair share.  What 
deceit and deception that this government would wreak havoc over 
Saskatchewan people by telling them, oh we're giving you decentralization 
now.  It's not decentralization, it's forced relocation as I mentioned 
earlier.  And they're deceiving the Saskatchewan people, trying to buy 
their vote at election time. 
 
And do we know the cost of this?  Nobody knows the cost of it.  Department 
of Highways says it costs $50,000 a job.  The minister stands in the House 
and says it's going to be $10,000 a job.  Lay some paper on the Table.  Lay 
some paper on the Table to tell us what the cost is going to be.  You don't 
give Saskatchewan people, especially in rural Saskatchewan, the respect 
which they deserve for the intelligence they have in reading through what 
this Tory broken government is trying to inflict upon them. 
 
What is the cost, member from Moosomin?  Show us the cost.  Show us the 
cost/benefit analysis that's been done of  
 Dyour relocation plan.  I think what should be done is that the members of 
the Legislative Assembly that represent the Tory Party should be 
decentralized out of the city of Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And that'll be taken care of right after the next 
provincial election when almost every one of these Tory MLAs are 
decentralized from the Saskatchewan legislature, Mr. Speaker, and put back 
out into their home communities to explain what it is they've done to 
Saskatchewan people -- what it is they've done to Saskatchewan people. 
 
And what about Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, where this government says they're 
moving the Department of Agriculture to Humboldt.  Moving the Department of 
Agriculture to Humboldt, uprooting all the employees, some that have spent 
two decades and more living in one location, serving the people and serving 
the programs to agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan.  They threaten 



 

 

to rip them out of their homes and their families and relocate them in 
Humboldt.  That's not decentralization, Mr. Speaker, that's forced 
relocation. 
 
I'll give you an example of decentralization to Humboldt, Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker.  Do you remember the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, Mr. 
Speaker, a joint project of three prairie provinces located in the town of 
Humboldt?  PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) it was referred 
to.  That was decentralization.  It wasn't placed in Edmonton or Winnipeg 
or Regina or Saskatoon.  A New Democrat government saw the need to 
decentralize things that could be reasonably decentralized into rural 
Saskatchewan.  And I know the member from Humboldt appreciates PAMI being 
located in Humboldt.  I know that a facility like that could be expanded to 
make reasonable sense to employ more people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is support for decentralization from the New Democrats.  
There has always been support for decentralization by New Democrats.  The 
beauty of the rural communities where people do want to live by their 
choice, and they did want to live in rural Saskatchewan whether it was DNS 
(Department of Northern Saskatchewan) or Sask Forest Products or the dental 
program or the Potash Corporation or the Water Corporation or the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there's many more examples even in your own constituency, 
the beautiful constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood.  But don't force 
people like this -- to inflict your own political will upon the people of 
Saskatchewan to save the questionable hide of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's cruel what is happening in Saskatchewan today.  It's 
cruel and it's unusual.  And I don't know how any member of this government 
could go out in Saskatchewan and talk about the good job they've done, 
because it's non-existent.  It is non-existent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I travel throughout Saskatchewan, whether it's urban or 
rural, there's one question which keeps recurring: when is the election 
going to be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- When is this government going to muster the courage to call 
an election when they've gone beyond their traditional mandate?  And in the 
dying days of this cruel and ruthless government, they inflict a perception 
on some communities that it's going to be wealthy and create wealth.  It 
won't create wealth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the long run this government in their unplanned and uncompromising, 
unlistening way, that they bring down the final cut and the final cut is 
the deepest.  And that final cut, Mr. Speaker, will be just like cutting 
their own throats when the Saskatchewan people have the opportunity to 
express their democratic wishes in an election campaign. 
 
And it's not for those members in the government to stand up and say, we're 
saving rural Saskatchewan.  They can't maintain that, Mr. Speaker.  They 



 

 

are the ones who've destroyed rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And when the Saskatchewan people speak, Mr. Speaker, they'll speak with the 
force of the Saskatchewan community behind them -- that community that 
they've loved, that community that they've cultured, that community that 
they've created, that community that they have passion for, Mr. Speaker.  
And that passion will be translated into a ballot-box, and that ballot-box 
will reveal that this government has done too much harm to Saskatchewan 
people.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to take 
up too much time.  The previous speakers from our side of the House have 
put the argument very extensively and very proper to what the motion is 
actually pertaining to. 
 
I'd like to just bring a couple of realities, I think, to the members 
opposite as to what has been happening in Saskatchewan here.  And I heard 
now members of the opposition indicating that this government is 
responsible for the Canadian economy as well as the economy of the world in 
the picture that it had . . . actually the dilemma that agriculture had to 
be faced with here in the last, I guess, maybe six, seven years, as farmers 
well know. 
 
I don't believe truly that the member from The Battlefords actually 
believes a lot of what he says as well, Mr. Speaker, because farmers 
themselves actually realize that the problem in agriculture was not of the 
Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative government.  It wasn't caused by this 
government and the people in Saskatchewan recognize that fact as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite talked 
about small business, and small business probably is what I've always 
referred to in this legislature as big business.  Small business across not 
only Saskatchewan but across Canada, Mr. Speaker, employ the largest 
percentage of people across the province and across the country.  And 
nobody denies that.  You can have all the . . . I guess probably all the 
large businesses you want, but it does take that comparable amount in the 
small businesses to carry on with the services within areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to indicate, though, that members opposite, I believe in the last 
couple few days now have become, I would think, more sincere in their 
argument of being opposed to decentralization in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, no.  Fair Share. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Or as a member says, Fair Share. 
 
And I think probably if the members opposite would stop to think about what 



 

 

this program means to rural Saskatchewan, I think that they would probably 
tend to maybe watch what they say, Mr. Speaker.  We've got members opposite 
arguing against Fair Share and then we've got the Leader of the Opposition 
made a statement, Mr. Speaker, in Tisdale to the Tisdale media.  It said 
Romanow stated: 
 

 "For the PC's to say that we would cancel Fair Share is an outright lie," 
Romanow added. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here we have an NDP opposition wanting to have it both 
ways in this particular argument and presentation. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the small-business people in all the small 
communities that have already had the announcements on Fair Share 
decentralization in the province is that, Mr. Speaker, all the people in 
the positions that are coming to those communities are being welcomed with 
open arms.  And I would hope that the members opposite would see it more 
like that instead of arguing on the political side of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, I just wanted to make a couple of those points.  
And with that I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that we proceed to 
government orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wonder if it's possible, this being private members' 
day, in order to facilitate moving to government business, if the 
Government House Leader would outline what business we intend to go to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What I'd like to move to is 
Bill No. 55, The Agricultural Safety Net Bill and proceed on later in the 
day to do committee work on those two agricultural Bills, with leave on one 
of them from the opposition; and later perhaps get into some adjourned 
debates on referendums and plebiscites as well as The Medical Profession 
Act. 
 
But right now to move straight to Bill No. 55 under adjourned debates. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Martens that Bill No. 55 -- An Act respecting Programs to 
Stabilize the Income of Agricultural Producers be now read a second time. 



 

 

 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have much to say on 
this Bill and I would just like to take a little bit more time to sum up 
some of the points that we see as problems with this program. 
 
The first thing, Mr. Speaker, is that under current price scenarios this 
program will offer a declining support price over a period of time.  And 
this was one point that this government failed to do. In fact it was very 
obvious by its absence, the fact that throughout the whole process -- and I 
outlined this process that they went through, of meetings and confusion -- 
throughout this whole process there was never an analysis or different 
price scenarios put forward so that the people of this province could work 
out what the future might have in store for them. 
 
They should have, Mr. Speaker, put forward two or three or four or half a 
dozen assumed prices and what the prices would do to the program over a 
period of years.  For example, if prices stayed low, what the payment would 
be; if prices went high, what the payment would be; if prices fluctuated up 
and down, what the result of the payments would be. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this was never done because this government knew that 
there was the possibility that any increase in price, very marginal 
increase, or even the price holding its own, as you move forward from this 
year into future years, that the return from this program would be greatly 
reduced. 
 
So that point, Mr. Speaker, has to be made that the government never put 
forward, as we've seen time and time again with this government, not 
putting forward their analysis of a program that they want to see put in 
place.  So the declining support price is one bad feature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another point that I would like to make is that over a period 
of years, the GRIP program does not provide full cash costs.  There's no 
cost of production formula. And I've already made this, and I want to make 
that point one more time, that if this government wanted to put forward a 
long-term program and not potentially another short-term ad hoc program, 
they would have put in the formula a cost of production mechanism that 
entitled farmers to plug in their costs and get a return from that by 
paying a premium. 
 
They chose not to do that, to go to the 15-year averaging formula.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, we've gone through what that will do as we move off the high 
prices from the mid '70s  
 Dand move further into the potentially low prices for the early '90s.  
Then the capability of this program to provide benefits to farmers is 
greatly reduced.  In fact in four or five years this program could actually 
pay nothing to the farm community even though the prices are still low. 
 
Another point, Mr. Speaker, is the removal of spot-loss hail from GRIP.  
Now the members opposite will argue that well you don't need spot-loss 
hail, don't need spot-loss hail because this GRIP program is going to 
compensate you for the losses that you would've incurred from spot-loss 
hail.  Well that is true, Mr. Speaker, only if you are getting a return 



 

 

from the program.  But if we move into the future, four or five years down 
the road, and the program returns are cut -- in fact many farmers may not 
get their premium back or get no pay-out -- then they have to add out of 
their pocket the spot-loss hail to get hail coverage. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, I think is a direct harm to the farmers of this province 
because, although right now it would appear that it's not necessary, I'll 
tell you under very many scenarios in the future you're going to have to be 
paying spot-loss hail out of your pocket in order to get the coverage that 
you would've had. 
 
And the Premier, Mr. Speaker, talks about this program.  He is running 
around this province, waving his arms in the air, saying this is a bankable 
program.  You can go to the bank with it.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not 
true.  For board grains it is true.  For board grains it is true . . . for 
the most part it is true, I should say. 
 
But let's look at the example of open-market grains.  Because of the 
average price for the year, if I am a farmer who harvests my crop -- my 
canola for example -- and I sell my canola for $4 a bushel immediately off 
the field because I have to have the income to pay the bills, the pressure 
of bills from creditors, and the average price though for the year is, 
let's say, a dollar more.  Well that, Mr. Speaker, the difference between 
the average price and what I have sold my canola for, I lose. 
 
But if I'm a wealthy farmer or if I can afford to hang on to my grain for a 
period of time and try to work on the markets and try to get the best . . . 
the maximum return, then I sell my grain for a dollar more.  Well I gain 
the difference between the average price and what I sell my grain for.  
This program is not bankable because if you are forced into selling low, 
you're going to lose. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other point I'd like to make here is that two-thirds 
. . . statistics show two-thirds of the open-market grain is sold below the 
average price.  So what we're saying is two-thirds of the farmers are going 
to take a loss under this program. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this is a very good argument to put forward 
for including all grains under the Canadian Wheat Board.  Because under the 
Canadian Wheat Board, you know what your average price for the year is 
going to be, and you're getting that price in the end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people think that farmers should be playing the market.  
I heard the Premier saying, well, just think, you could hang onto your 
grain; you could sit on it and wait till the price goes up, and you can get 
the benefit from the GRIP program and you can also sell your grain at a 
high price. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell you that that is a scenario for very few people 
in this province.  But it tells you something.  It tells you how the 
minister thinks.  It tells you the terms in which the Premier of this 
province thinks about the farm community. 
 



 

 

He is saying that everybody is so well off they can just afford to sit on 
their grain and wait until the price goes up, sell it, get the benefit of 
not only the average price but the difference between the average price and 
what they sold their grain for.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
majority of people in this province, that is not true.  Besides the fact, 
as I said, that two-thirds of this grain is sold under the average price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next point I want to make in summary is the fact that 
there is no cap on this program.  This program, and I've heard of people . 
. . people have called me, saying, you know that there's somebody going 
around in a certain area; they're buying or renting up all the land they 
can rent from any institution they can get their hands on, because there's 
no cap.  So they can run around and get 50 or 60 or 100 quarters of land, 
farm it the way it should not be farmed, by putting very few input costs 
into it, and then farm the program. 
 
That's another problem with this government, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
think that it's survival of the fittest out there.  If somebody can get in 
there and farm this program, well they're a good operator; they're smart 
cookies.  But that's an attitude problem that this government has.  They're 
not governing for everybody in this province.  They're governing for people 
like themselves who try to take advantage of every system and every 
opportunity at the public trough that they can to benefit themselves. 
 
(1615) 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is deplorable.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, any 
changes that should be made, this is a very important change, that there be 
a cap on this program. 
 
0he last point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that the farm groups who 
helped put this program together in the beginning had a very 
well-principled program.  Principles were fine.  But as of October last 
year the farm groups had little or no input into the development of this 
program. 
 
The government people have taken this program and destroyed it because now 
it is not a national program, it's a patchwork program, because Alberta's 
going to have certain requirements that they think they need, Manitoba's 
going to have certain requirements they think they need.  And because 
there's so much emphasis and so much off-loading from the federal 
government, the provinces say, well we're paying part of this bill now; 
we're going to have some say in how it works. 
 
It's not a national program.  And you look at any other program around the 
world, farm agricultural programs, and the key to the success of that 
program is that it's a national program, administered and delivered by the 
national government.  The United States is that way; the European community 
is that way; Australia is that way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that that works around the world, the 
members opposite, the Premier of this province, the Minister of 
Agriculture, doesn't have enough gall to stand up to the Prime Minister and 



 

 

say, no that's wrong; we think that it's a national responsibility.  He 
won't do that because he's in the throes of an election and he's trying to 
salvage his hide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program, the way it stands right now, will benefit in the 
short term.  The problem is short-term program, basically another ad hoc if 
things continue the same.  No cost of production, no cap, and the bottom 
line, Mr. Speaker, is that there must be changes made to this program. 
 
As I sit on this side of the House, I tell people that this government had 
an opportunity to create a good program.  Mind you it was eight, nine years 
late, but they had the opportunity.  They had the farm groups in; they had 
everybody working with them.  And what did they do?  They destroyed it.  
They destroyed it because they don't have the will to create a farm program 
that's going to have the long-term benefit to the farmers of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude by saying that this Bill will in the short 
term help. And for that reason I will not oppose it.  But I'll tell you the 
people of this province want a government in power that will improve the 
delivery of this type of services to the farmers.  And I think that we will 
provide that service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to relate 
briefly a little bit of a review of the tremendous pressures and problems 
that we have encountered in agriculture in the province, with low commodity 
prices and crop failures in many instances, international subsidies, 
massive farm debt in Saskatchewan and throughout Canada. 
 
And this government opposite has indicated that it has done so much for 
agriculture.  And I want to say that, Mr. Speaker, that that is far from 
the truth.  Throughout the years, their programs were directly related to 
the various elections.  Their programs were ad hoc programs.  We saw the 
first infusion of money into the agriculture as the Premier was in the 
midst of an election -- on the verge of losing -- who phones the Prime 
Minister and says, I'm losing; I need some help.  That was the agricultural 
policy of the Tory Party opposite. 
 
In 1988 we got another version of the federal election.  And the Tories 
again, in desperate . . . they trying to sustain their support in the West, 
devised again yet another ad hoc program, deceiving the farmers that they 
were going to get $45 an acre.  And the farmers realized far less. 
 
In 1985, the Premier said we need a long-term agricultural policy.  And out 
of this came the GRIP program.  And while it took him from 1985 until this 
last winter to come forward with a long-term program, he forced it upon the 
farmers in a very limited time -- didn't give them an opportunity to in 
fact digest the program or properly assess it. 
 
And they're saying that now they've got a safety net for farmers.  They're 
going to save all the farmers, that this is the panacea for the problems of 
agriculture. 



 

 

 
And do you realize that in order to get farmers to enrol in this program so 
they can go into the election and announce that it's a great success and 
that some 53,000 farmers had signed up, the federal government had to -- in 
fact in respect to the NISA program -- pump money into an account for each 
of the farmers without any sign-up or any participation of the farmer.  And 
in order to get them to sign up for the GRIP program, they've had to bribe 
them, in essence, with paying a part of the revenue insurance premium. 
 
Now farmers have concerns with the program.  They're concerned that there 
is no assurance that this program is sustainable over any length of time.  
I talked to farmers throughout the province and farmers that went to the 
various meetings throughout this province held by the government.  And they 
said, well may have pretty fair pay-out for the first couple of years, but 
after that you'd better watch it, because on the basis of the way it's 
calculated it could well decrease.  So first of all, the farmers say that 
there's no assurance that the program is sustainable over a length of time 
to give them protection.  And secondly, they said it's very costly to enrol 
in the program.  And I agree with that. 
 
Remember the Premier that was standing here last spring in this legislature 
-- and we were delaying and delaying any assistance to Saskatchewan farmers 
-- said he had a commitment out of federal government.  But he was not 
going to concede that the province was going to put up any money for a 
program that would give assistance to the farmers.  And the federal 
government, on the other hand, was requesting that the provincial 
government put in a portion of the funding.  And he held up and he said . . 
. the problem, he said, is international, is caused by the Europeans 
subsidizing their farmers and by the U.S., and he said therefore it should 
be a national solution to this problem, not on the provincial governments 
and the taxpayers of the province. 
 
And what has happened when it comes to financing of this program?  The 
Premier suddenly lost contact with the reality that he was propounding here 
last spring.  And if you take a look at this program, one of the 
significant things that you find is the off-loading of responsibility of 
funding for agriculture assistance by the federal government, and a further 
placing of the burden on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and the producers.  
That's what has happened. 
 
If you take a look at . . . Since we have a Tory government in Ottawa and a 
Tory government sitting opposite, what has happened in respect to crop 
insurance?  Previously it was producers, 50 per cent; federal government, 
50 per cent.  Province paid the administration.  And what did the Premier 
allow and what did the Associate Minister of Agriculture allow the federal 
government to do?  To  
 Doff-load.  And you know what happens in respect to production insurance: 
50 per cent, producer; 25 per cent, federal; 25 per cent, provincial.  
Off-loading -- federal government decreasing the responsibility in the 
support of agriculture. 
 
And then with revenue insurance: producers, thirty-three and a third per 
cent; federal, forty-one and two-thirds; provincial, 25.  Administration, 



 

 

50/50.  Total program, total program: 40 per cent, producer; 35 per cent, 
federal; provincial, 25 per cent. 
 
Now that's off-loading to the provincial.  And one of the basic problems in 
respect to the low prices is caused by the international situation both in 
Europe and support in the United States.  And what we're asking the farmers 
and the producers to do is to take on the federal treasury of the United 
States and the federal treasuries of European Economic Community and 
allowing the federal government to off-load onto the provinces. 
 
And if you take a look at comparisons, it shows further, Mr. Speaker, how 
the federal government has significantly cut back their support for 
agriculture.  Even on their limited basis of analysis, current safety nets, 
that's the ones we had in place prior to these programs that are going to 
save agriculture -- the western grain stabilization, crop insurance levy -- 
and the federal government cost 268 million; provincial, all it cost was 
$42 million under the old programs; producer, 229 million.  Total, 540. 
 
Well we got new safety nets now.  And you know what?  The federal 
government doesn't sustain it by $268 million; they cut theirs back to 
246.7 million.  The province picks up not 42 million under the old 
programs, but 165 million.  And the producer goes from 229 million to 248 
million.  Clearly, a clear indication that this government opposite has 
allowed the federal government to off-load the responsibility of helping 
agriculture onto the producer and onto the provincial treasury. 
 
And this was the Premier that last spring said, oh we can't have an 
agreement until we have that proper ratio of 8:1.  And he sets up a program 
here in desperation for an election. 
 
And so the federal government, sure they came along and they said, we'll 
sweeten it up a little bit because we're off the hook.  Take a look, in one 
year -- 268, 246 -- quite a good saving for us.  And that's for perpetuity 
from here on in.  And so we can afford to throw in a little . . . few bucks 
to get people to sign up for the program.  And that's what they did. 
 
So that's what has happened.  It's a Premier that delayed getting any 
long-term agricultural policy together.  He spoke of it in '85.  Now it's 
election time and he's saying sign up, this is the solution, we have the 
safety net that's going to protect the farmers.  But I say, what he has 
done is let Brian Mulroney and the Prime Minister and the federal Tories 
off the hook. 
 
As I said, there was a considerable amount of confusion with the program, 
because as the ministers and members of the office of the government went 
around explaining it, different answers were given at different meetings.  
And as a consequence there was a tremendous amount of hurry to get people 
to sign up before they had the full details. 
 
I want also to say that here is a party that says they want to preserve 
rural Saskatchewan, and that a recent report says that what has happened is 
that the debt has risen both in Saskatchewan and in agriculture over the 
past year -- from 22 billion to 24 billion.  And we know it's up to 24 



 

 

billion, my friends, agriculture across Canada, from 22 billion. 
 
(1630) 
 
Saskatchewan is up. The debt is up substantially only because it's not 6 
billion as it was when you guys . . . at the peak, because obviously the 
banks have repossessed a lot of land, a million acres of land.  And of 
course that debt is no longer recorded as debt owing.  It's written off.  
But don't ever tell me that the debt of the farmers has not increased. 
 
And what is wrong with the policies next, of the members opposite?  What is 
wrong, Mr. Speaker, is that out there in their own admissions, there are 
10,000 farmers who have lost their land or are on the verge of losing their 
land or have legal proceedings to lose their land -- and not one single 
recognition of that problem in so far as debt restructuring. 
 
Commitment to agriculture!  Your commitment is that those who can survive 
out there -- the bigger they are, the better you like it.  That's your 
agricultural policy.  Reward success, they say.  They don't analyse it and 
see that there is a section of young farmers that are in trouble and then 
address it.  No, no.  What you want to have is a universal program to 
reward success, as the Premier said. 
 
Well you aren't going to save a great number of farmers.  And I'll tell 
you, the farmers that haven't been able to sign up are those that couldn't 
afford the costly premiums.  That's the problem.  And many of them are 
going to be losing their farms, and these programs are not going to save 
those.  And this government has refused to address or put in place any debt 
restructuring. 
 
They say they have a program here with GRIP and NISA that's a safety net, 
and over and above that there's a third line of defence.  The problem is, 
Mr. Speaker, that there is no third line of defence.  That's a myth that's 
been perpetrated again on the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
In my concluding remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in respect to 
NISA, I talked to the young farmers out there that are struggling with 
heavy debt, and they don't support putting into place the program NISA.  
The young farmers are saying, ha, if I was in a position to the extent that 
I can put money into . . . for savings, it would be fine.  But why wouldn't 
you certainly address those young farmers that are losing their land and 
get them going before you start assisting those that have money to put 
aside? 
 
I'm not against the principle.  Debt restructuring you need.  Over 
two-thirds of the debt is held either by . . . by government, and it can be 
restructured.  Why not save those farmers?  That's the question.  And the 
people of Saskatchewan and the farmers are asking that. 
 
So I want to say in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that there's no doubt that the 
GRIP program will give some protection.  I agree with that.  I don't think 
it goes far enough, as my colleague has said.  And as the farmers have 
said, it should have been tied closer to the cost of production. 



 

 

 
And the federal government obviously should be paying more.  And I say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that the other aspect that should be dealt with is those 
that need assistance in restructuring of debt.  We have indicated that as 
part of our platform.  We have urged you to do that.  And to this date, no 
steps have been taken. 
 
As my colleague indicated, that we're prepared to give support to the GRIP 
program, very reluctantly to NISA at this stage of the game, because while 
it has a place, it's a very, very rich program.  And if you have that kind 
of money for those who are well enough to use it, why don't you help out 
those that need help?  That's the thing. 
 
I don't think you need a millionaire farmer that's well-to-do needing to 
get subsidy on interest rates.  Yes, sir.  What we need is a program that 
will keep people on the land, not a Tory program that will only help those 
who don't need help.  We need a program that will help the small farmer, 
the young farmer that's in debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And so I close, Mr. Speaker, and say agriculture has not 
been addressed by this government.  And what is more regrettable is that 
they have allowed the federal government to off-load any cost of programs 
onto the provincial government and onto the producer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a few comments today 
respecting this GRIP Bill that is before the legislature today.  Mr. 
Speaker, what we have is an attempt to tie this GRIP-NISA Bill to the 
provincial sales tax by the government who said they needed that provincial 
sales tax desperately to pay for this Bill, the GRIP-NISA program for 
farmers. 
 
And I want to clearly tell government members that urban people don't buy 
it.  Farmers don't buy it.  What we have is your blatant attempt to try and 
blame farmers for your Conservative government mismanagement over the last 
nine years.  Farmers don't buy it.  Urban people don't buy it.  You're 
trying to divide and conquer and it doesn't work. 
 
This Bill is part of the government agenda.  The motivation for the 
GRIP-NISA Bill is purely electoral, purely political.  By way of making my 
case, Mr. Speaker, if the government opposite was sincere about setting up 
a long-term stabilization program for farmers, why would you wait until 
four years and eight months into your dying term?  Why wait until you've 
been everything but forced to call an immediate election?  Why did it take 
more than nine years to develop any kind of a program that would provide 
any meaningful help to farmers? 
 
And you can't blame your cousins in Ottawa either because you've had seven 
years of majority Conservative government in Ottawa and in Saskatchewan, 
seven and nine years respectively of majority Conservative governments, and 



 

 

not a long-term stabilization program for Saskatchewan farmers at a time 
when it is desperately needed.  Instead you practise this divide and 
conquer, this let's blame the farmers for your mismanagement, for your 
deficit. 
 
We've got a new tax, the provincial sales tax that is going to hit all 
consumers of this province, going to extract more than $400 million in new 
money.  And it has nothing to do with the Bill before us today, and it has 
everything to do with covering up your waste, your mismanagement.  Farmers 
won't have it, as I've said before, nor will we. 
 
Family farms, Mr. Speaker, are being forced into bankruptcy because of the 
inaction of Conservative governments provincially and federally.  Any 
action that there has been, including the major portion of this GRIP Bill, 
is designed, if you think about it, not with the idea of keeping farmers 
that are marginal on the land.  This Bill is designed to put money into the 
relatively few very well off farmers, the most well established farmers, 
put some extra money into their pocket.  But it's also more fundamentally 
designed to protect the lending institutions, the friends of the 
Conservatives federally and provincially.  This program is designed for the 
banks and not for Saskatchewan farmers.  That's part of the major flaw in 
this Bill. 
 
I am hearing stories, Mr. Speaker, from my rural friends about GRIP 
assignments to the lending institutions, GRIP assignments to the banks.  
And what's happening?  It's forcing farmers to go locally for their fuel, 
locally for their chemicals, locally for their seed and other inputs -- all 
done locally.  But when the banks foreclose, because the banks have the 
assignment on the GRIP payment, who's left holding the bag but the local 
supplier.  The local suppliers will be left with the debt and the banks 
will be fully protected.  The small local businesses will be left with the 
debt; the family farmers will be removed from the land; and the banks will 
be fully covered thanks to your government policies -- Conservatives 
federally and provincially -- designed to protect the banks and leave the 
small suppliers unprotected. 
 
And that's a shame because those small suppliers of fuel and seed and 
fertilizer and chemicals, those small suppliers, they are desperately in 
need of business.  They're part of the community, they're proud of it, and 
as they have every right to be proud of it.  And this Bill doesn't do 
anything for them other than they allow the farmer to get a little bit 
further into debt and cover the banks so that they can foreclose when it's 
advantageous to the banks. 
 
My colleagues from Humboldt and Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker, have outlined our 
many concerns with these Bills.  I felt compelled to outline some of my 
concerns with the GRIP, NISA Bill.  It's by no means a comprehensive list 
of my concerns, but those were a few of the major concerns I have with it. 
 
I will reluctantly be supporting this Bill.  But I want the government to 
know that they're not fooling farmers and they're not fooling urban people.  
This government's actions are purely and simply an attempt to blame farmers 
for their mismanagement, the government's mismanagement and the 



 

 

government's bungling of the province's finances, and nobody is buying any 
of that.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:43 p.m. until 4:47 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Devine Gleim t 
 Muller McLaren t 
 Schmidt Baker t 
 Klein Swan t 
 Hodgins Johnson t 
 McLeod Saxinger t 
 Lane Romanow t 
 Meiklejohn Prebble t 
 Hardy Rolfes t 
 Kopelchuk Lingenfelter t 
 Petersen Tchorzewski t 
 Wolfe Koskie t 
 Martens Brockelbank t 
 Hopfner Mitchell t 
 Martin Upshall t 
 Neudorf Kowalsky t 
 Gerich Solomon t 
 Swenson Anguish t 
 Britton Lautermilch t 
 Toth Trew t 
 Duncan Smart t 
-- 42 R 

Nays 
-- 00 R 
The Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, referred to a 
Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: -- Before I leave the Chair, in response to an earlier 
question during orders of the day, the member from Saskatoon Nutana was 
inquiring about when the information regarding the questions raised by the 
hon. member for Regina Centre last Thursday would be forthcoming, and I 
indicated to her at that time that it would be very, very soon.  I'm 
pleased that I now have the information, and I table the information. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


