





























































Hansard: May 10, 1991


 

 

May 10/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, on behalf 
of my colleague, the member for Regina North East, to introduce to you six 
guests from the Saskatchewan Abilities Council.  They're seated behind the 
rail.  They're accompanied by Joyce Sevigny and Lynne Demeule who are 
supervisors of the life enrichment program at the Saskatchewan Abilities 
Council. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me to welcome these guests here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to 
introduce through you and to the Legislative Assembly members here, nine 
grade 10 students from the town or the village of Bjorkdale in my 
constituency.  They're here today accompanied by their principal, Mr. 
Canning, along with some chaperons: Holly Currey and Bertha Woswiczka.  I 
think I said that right.  I'm not quite sure.  I asked my colleague here 
how to say it properly. 
 
I want to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly.  I hope that they find 
the question period both interesting and informative.  I'm sure that they 
will find that.  I'll meet with them afterwards for pictures and some 
questions they may have in regards to what goes on here in the Legislative 
Assembly.  I hope they find the tour here both enlightening.  And I would 
ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to join with me in welcoming 
the students from my constituency in Bjorkdale here to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like 
to introduce to you a very special person of mine, been special to me all 
my life -- my mother, who is sitting in the west gallery over there. 
 
She lives in our town of Hudson Bay.  She's a pioneer, a true pioneer.  She 
moved from the south here in the Weyburn area to the Hudson Bay in 1934.  
We still own the same homestead that her and dad homesteaded on back in 
those days.  Today, Mr. Speaker, she's celebrating her 81st birthday. 
 
I'd like all members of the Legislative Assembly to join in welcoming to 
the Legislative Assembly a very special person to me. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, allow me to introduce to 
you, and through you to this Assembly, 23 grade 8 students seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, from Carnduff Elementary School.  Mr. Speaker, I look 
forward to meeting with them a little later for pictures and refreshments 
and just a discussion on what they see take place in the Assembly this 
morning. 
 
They're accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Keating and Mr. Nicholls and 
chaperons, Mrs. Logue -- I hope I've got that right -- and Mr. Logue, the 
bus driver.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming these students and their chaperons and teachers to the Assembly 
this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- And, Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet allow me to introduce 
just a couple of other individuals who have joined us this morning.  
They're seated in the east gallery: Mr. Steve McLellan from TISASK (Tourism 
Industry Association of Saskatchewan), and a gentleman from my area, a 
business man from the Kenosee Lake area, Mr. Loren Sproat.  Would members 
join with me in welcoming these guests? 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join my hon. friend from Moosomin for welcoming the students and 
teachers from Carnduff.  That is my home town and my parents still live 
there.  My mother works at the Legion and my father is the town foreman and 
farms in that area, or just sold the farm.  So I know that you would know 
my folks.  So I just want to say a special welcome in joining the hon. 
member. 
 
And I was just recently in Carnduff and I get back there fairly often.  So 
I know it's a yearly event, it has been for 30 or 40 years, for the class 
to come to the legislature, the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
barracks, and the museum.  So I hope you have a good day, and all the best 
to you for a safe trip back home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Nurses' Strike 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
is to the Minister of Health.  Mr. Speaker, as you know, as of 7 o'clock 
this morning most Saskatchewan hospitals are without nursing staff except 
for the most life-threatening of emergencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister, in our judgement, had lots of prior warning 
about this particular development, so my question to him is the question 
that most Saskatchewan people are asking today.  Mr. Minister, what steps 



 

 

are you taking today to try to bring about the speedy resolution of this 
dispute?  And what steps are you taking today to protect the health care of 
the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no question that we are dealing 
with a difficult dispute, and we have to temper the entire situation 
regarding the public interest as well as honouring the bargaining process.  
This has been going on for quite some time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My department and my prime role is to be of assistance in a labour dispute 
and not an interventionist.  We did appoint a conciliator to both sides.  
The conciliating process worked very, very well.  And our conciliator was 
able, through an awful lot of diligence and work with all the parties, was 
able to clear many issues that hadn't been resolved and has done a good job 
till then.  Unfortunately, as well all know, the negotiations broke down 
last night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I must say as a preface, Mr. 
Speaker, that I'm somewhat surprised that the member from Regina South is 
answering the question.  I understand under what dimension it is, but the 
last several days the responsibility for answering about this dispute falls 
on the Deputy Premier and the Minister of Health, and this I think is a 
puzzling if not significant development. 
 
So I'm going to go back to the Minister of Health because what we're 
concerned about here is certainly a matter of labour dispute, but we're 
concerned about also the safety in the health-care system.  And therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to ask the Minister of Health, the Deputy Premier, 
who is after all the next senior minister in the government behind the 
Premier, this. The conciliation services to which the former member has 
referred clearly have not been successful, because we have the dispute.  
They may not be successful, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly both the 
nurses and the hospitals are suspicious of this government with respect to 
this dispute.  This is no criticism of the conciliation officer, just 
simply means that he or she is working under this kind of handicap. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy Premier is this: in the 
interests of trying to resolve the dispute as quickly as possible, why not 
consider an outside professional conciliator which is acceptable to both 
sides?  Perhaps a fresh face with a fresh perspective one step removed from 
this government might be the solution to finding some common ground.  Will 
the Deputy Premier tell us whether he'll consider this particular 
suggestion, and if not, why not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, the suggestion that the hon. member 
opposite has just put forward . . . After much discussion with my 
department and officials throughout last night and early this morning, I'm 



 

 

pleased to say that we have offered both parties the assistance of 
third-party intervention by way of a mediator.  We are presently awaiting 
their response. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. minister, I guess the Deputy Premier 
has decided to withdraw from this issue on this aspect of it and I find 
that unfortunate; but I will ask, I guess, the minister who's taking 
responsibility this morning. 
 
The minister says that he has offered both sides the offices of a mediator.  
I would ask the minister to advise the members of the House who that person 
is, the terms of reference that that person has been given, the timetable 
which that person has been provided with, and what the minister expects the 
response is going to be from both the nurses and the SHA (Saskatchewan 
Health-Care Association), the other people on the other side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that suggestion I can't agree with, 
because it endangers the entire process.  I think what we have to do is get 
both sides first to agree, indeed to a mediator and hopefully a mediator 
that would be acceptable to both sides. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary question to the 
minister.  The minister says that the answer to the question would somehow 
endanger the whole process. 
 
Now presumably, Mr. Minister, your government must have been thinking about 
the possibility of a fall-back position such as mediation.  I would argue 
you're behind the curve on this, given the fact that we have a strike.  But 
none the less you must have been giving it some thought.  Surely to 
goodness the name is not a recent development, that is to say, within the 
last few hours.  That name must have been suggested to the parties well 
before 10 o'clock this morning. 
 
It is in the public interest, I would submit, for you to tell the House and 
the legislature who it is you have in mind to provide the mediation 
services and the terms of reference.  What is the reason for not providing 
that information to the public of Saskatchewan who are so concerned about 
getting this dispute resolved quickly as possible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said at the outset of my questions, my 
role is one of assistance, not intervention, and until we have a mediator 
that is acceptable to both sides, to directly have to appoint one that may 
not be acceptable to either, will get us nowhere. 
 
This offer is there. Both sides are aware that a mediation process is 



 

 

there, and you just can't pick a mediator out of the air.  We have to see 
who indeed it is that they would be comfortable in working with, hopefully 
both sides would agree on the same one, and then that the whole mediation 
process would begin.  But indeed, we have to see if they are truly 
interested in a mediator.  Both sides have indicated that they're still 
prepared to continue discussions without third-party intervention. 
 
Well I think that part of the process, of the bargaining process, is to 
allow them that part of the very important part of the bargaining process 
without intervention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the government 
opposite.  Mr. Speaker, I preface my question by observing the following 
fact: that up until the actual dispute broke out unfortunately this 
morning, we had the Deputy Premier taking the position of non-intervention.  
My colleague made specific suggestions over the last few question periods 
about conciliation proceedings, conciliation boards, and other dimensions, 
all of which were rejected by the government. 
 
Is the minister saying in effect, by refusing to provide the public any 
details as to what he has in mind, that he continues on in the policy that 
the Deputy Premier has adopted, namely in effect, a hands-off approach? 
 
Notwithstanding the fact that there is high public concern about the 
necessity of resolving this quickly, that there's concern by patients, 
concerns by families who are affected by this dispute, is the minister 
saying that we the public must be left in the dark, notwithstanding the 
fact that the situation has changed so radically in 24 hours, we do now 
have a major dispute.  Surely you can't be saying that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it very difficult that the Leader of 
the Opposition stands in this line of questioning trying to have some form 
of negotiation on the floor of this Assembly.  I always thought that the 
party that they represent certainly represented the bargaining process.  
And we are dealing with that bargaining process.  I have offered them a 
mediator.  Now surely, are you saying that we should take the heavy hand of 
a dictator and say, you accept this one? 
 
We are dealing with a very difficult situation, Mr. Speaker, and we must 
measure the public interest versus the bargaining process.  We believe that 
the steps that we have taken -- and particularly in the past two weeks -- 
the steps that we have taken have been very, very sound.  We have had all 
of various things in the health-care system that the Minister of Health has 
explained in place.  The conciliation process was indeed working.  How was 
anybody to determine in advance of 7 o'clock this morning that indeed a 
strike would be called.  And how . . . Well they say, oh.  Then they have 
no faith in the bargaining process, Mr. Speaker.  And if they have no faith 
in the bargaining process, then obviously the appointment of a mediator is 
not their concern but rather they're making it a political issue. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Crime Compensation for Abused Women 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Justice and it has to do with the Report of the Ombudsman in regards to the 
Crimes Compensation Board's ruling that an abused woman is not entitled to 
compensation if she does not leave an abusive home, Mr. Minister, and is 
subsequently abused again. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, I find to be quite ridiculous and it does not take into 
consideration the situation that an abused spouse finds herself in -- the 
fear that she suffers and her desire, of course, to keep the family 
together.  Now, Mr. Minister, do you agree that this problem should be 
corrected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well as I indicated to the press, I would not have made 
the same decision as the Crimes Compensation Board; however, they do have 
the right to make the decision. 
 
One of the difficulties that we had under the existing legislation is that 
because no award was made . . . the Act says that a minister can only vary 
an award, so there has to be an award in the first place. 
 
My response when asked this by the media the other day is to advise them, 
and I advise the hon. member in the House, that in addition to reviewing 
the operations of the board, we are looking at the broader question -- in 
light of the victims' compensation fund -- to a broader review of victims' 
compensation and services.  And the internal review was started some 
several months back.  As of yesterday, the department advised me they 
expect to have it in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, women don't want to find some recourse in some 
back-door solution.  Now you said the department is going to be forthcoming 
with some changes.  Is this going to correct the situation, or what is it 
going to do for women who repeatedly find themselves in this position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I believe the report will, one, correct the situation.  
But secondly, I have made it clear to the hon. member that it will as well 
be a broader report than just the matter of crimes compensation.  The hon. 
member may be aware that about two years ago, established under the 
Criminal Code, were the victims' compensation fund.  And the courts have 
the power to levy certain additional charges.  That fund now exists. 
 
And we will be going further without getting into all of the details in 
terms of, one, compensation; secondly, things like mediation and being able 



 

 

to expand those types of services of help and assistance to victims of 
crime. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, this appears to be a delaying tactic with all 
due respect.  I believe that if there was some clarification in The 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act, some clarification with respect to this 
issue that the problem could be solved instantly. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, rather than waiting for some back-door solution and some 
report of which you're not sure exactly when it's going to be forthcoming, 
would you support a private members' Bill from this side of the House that 
would provide that clarification in The Criminal Injuries Compensation Act, 
so that women who are subject to violent situations will be treated equally 
as soon as this legislation is in effect? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, the government is looking very actively at 
its own legislation this session but, as I say, I expect the report from 
the advice of my officials to be imminent and I think we should take a look 
at that report.  Those that are concerned about the issues of compensation 
to innocent victims of crime may be supportive of a much broader approach 
to the problem than dealing with the specific issue, which is not in any 
way to minimize the specific issue but certainly if legislation is 
necessary, and the other report would be delayed, certainly we'll be 
bringing in legislation. 
 

Weyerhaeuser Repayments 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I direct my question to the minister responsible for the 
Crown Investments Corporation.  Mr. Minister, it was about a year ago that 
I asked you whether or not the Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, 
Washington had paid any of the $236 million purchase price for the Prince 
Albert Pulp Company.  A year ago they hadn't.  In the ensuing year, has the 
company paid any portion of the money owing to the province?  And, Mr. 
Minister, has it paid the province the $10 million in dividends that it 
owes the citizens of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that Weyerhaeuser is 
living up absolutely to the terms and conditions of the agreement that was 
put in place in terms of their obligation to the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the Crown, and the Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  The member from 
Athabasca is asking a question.  Deputy Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I will be 
brief in this question if you will.  Has Weyerhaeuser paid any of the money 
it owes the province since I asked these questions last year?  Mr. 
Minister, I ask you that question.  Have they paid one cent to this 
province since I asked you that question last year, on the principal of the 
$236 million loan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can only repeat what I just said a moment ago -- 
that they're living up to the terms and conditions of the agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it's that kind of value-added manufacturing and processing that 
Weyerhaeuser is undertaking, Mr. Speaker, that is diversifying our economy, 
that's stabilizing the provincial economy.  It's that kind of business 
investment, Mr. Speaker, that the investment dealers association, when they 
put out their report today on Saskatchewan, was talking about when they 
said: last year in Saskatchewan business investment rose by 16 per cent.  
And this year I think they're projecting another 10 per cent increase 
because of other diversification projects like the upgrader and Saferco and 
Rafferty, Mr. Speaker.  Saskatchewan has a very good business climate, and 
Weyerhaeuser, we're proud to have them as part of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you have just 
indicated . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  I don't wish to 
interrupt you but it's difficult to hear you.  There are too many 
interruptions. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you have 
just indicated to the citizens of Saskatchewan that Weyerhaeuser has not 
paid one cent of the $236 million that they owe this province.  Mr. 
Minister, it was 5 years ago when your government sold PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company) to Weyerhaeuser, in a deal which we characterized at the time 
as no money down, no money for 30 years.  That still seems to be the case, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  I'm sorry to interrupt you 
again, but again it is difficult to hear you.  I'm warning the hon. 
members.  And I'm going to keep interrupting.  We can't have this constant 
interference when the members are on their feet, and I'm going to now allow 
the hon. member for Athabasca to put his question. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you don't 
seem to understand that what upsets the people of Saskatchewan is a 
government which could make such an incompetent deal.  Mr. Minister, would 
you indicate as to when, if ever, Saskatchewan taxpayers could expect to 
see some of the money Weyerhaeuser owes this province? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, we've been, and I think the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan have been, very happy with the performance of Weyerhaeuser in 
this province.  They're meeting the terms and conditions of the agreements 
and the contracts.  They've taken a $91,000-a-day losing operation, they've 
turned into a more -- under the NDP (New Democratic Party) -- into a more 
diversified operation.  They've built the plant, Mr. Speaker, the paper 
plant, that they said, the NDP said, would never get built, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And once again we see the narrow-mindedness, the narrowed dogma of the NDP 
coming through.  If it isn't a Crown corporation, if it isn't a Crown 
corporation leading the charge, it's no good.  They don't like business 
diversifying in our economy.  They're not interested in wealth creation and 
the new jobs that have come with the diversification and the stability that 
brings to our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, could you 
stand up and indicate how much money has been paid in the last five years 
on the principal on the $236 million that Weyerhaeuser owes this province?  
How much money have they paid on that principal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I can bring back the details on the 
payments that have flowed from Weyerhaeuser to the government, Mr. Speaker.  
And along with that I'd like to bring along the record as it relates to new 
jobs, as it relates to what this manufacturing has meant . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order, order, 
order.  Is the Minister of Finance concluded?  It's difficult to hear him.  
I'm sure the media can hear him.  They don't need prompting.  Allow the 
Minister of Finance to conclude his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was attempting to say, I will bring 
back the information for the hon. members.  And I will include with that, 
Mr. Speaker, the details on the number of new jobs that have been created 
there -- what that expanded business has meant to Prince Albert and area 
and what the spin-offs have meant in terms of stabilizing and diversifying 
our economy. 
 
If we're going to get away, Mr. Speaker, from the rain and the price of 
wheat controlling our economy, this kind of diversification . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Derby Cone Shut-down 
 



 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the minister that's responsible for Economic Diversification, 
Trade and unemployment in this province.  Mr. Minister, I see once again 
that your government's incompetence and your own personal incompetence has 
led to another economic failure in this province, with the loss of jobs and 
with the loss of another closed business here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, tell us today: why did you let Derby Cone of Canada  -- which 
employed 34 workers here in Regina, which used Saskatchewan grain, which 
used Saskatchewan natural gas as their major input -- why did you allow 
that to go under, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy to respond to the 
question today as minister responsible for SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation).  SEDCO had a loan with the original Derby Cone 
venture.  The individuals that were running that particular enterprise, Mr. 
Speaker, ran into some financial difficulty last year, and the individual 
in question made a business decision to shut that particular venture down. 
 
It wasn't at SEDCO's request that that particular thing was closed down.  
In fact negotiations have been ongoing all spring to resurrect that 
business and have it up employing people in the city of Regina.  And as I 
say, those efforts are ongoing all the time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of Economic 
Diversification, Trade and underdevelopment.  The reason why I'm asking it, 
Mr. Speaker, is this: is that two days prior to the owner, the original 
owner of Derby Cone turning the keys in to SEDCO, the minister responsible 
for SEDCO -- and I called him and talked to him personally on the phone -- 
didn't know a thing about this. 
 
That's why I'm asking the Minister of Economic Diversification.  You're the 
one who's been pushing diversification.  You're the one who's saying that 
we have to develop small businesses.  You're the one that's saying that 
we've got to use Saskatchewan inputs.  We see that you're draining hundreds 
of millions of dollars to Weyerhaeuser, hundreds of millions of dollars to 
Cargill, yet you, Mr. Minister, are involved in shutting down a locally 
owned, locally developed Saskatchewan business.  Why the double standard, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is absolutely right 
that he did call me on this particular matter and I did appreciate the 
call.  SEDCO tries to be as co-operative as possible with the business 
sector in this province.  Indeed some of the programs that have been used 
by businesses like Derby Cone have been very successful.  Saskatchewan has 
the lowest unemployment record, I believe, in the country as of today.  
We've been able to create and maintain a lot of jobs. 



 

 

 
In the question of this particular enterprise, SEDCO had no intention of 
closing the business down, Mr. Speaker.  The individual in question took a 
look at the business, made a business decision that he would close it down 
to prevent, I suppose, any further losses that might have been incurred.  
But that was a business decision by a business person.  It was no one in 
this government, Mr. Speaker, that shut that business down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
 DThe Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to continue . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now I'm going to ask the Minister of Justice 
again, the Deputy Premier, the member for Regina Centre, and the member for 
Regina Elphinstone, those four people, to allow the member for Athabasca to 
make his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to continue on 
today where I left off yesterday.  And that was indicating and bringing 
forth the argument as to how we got into this terrible mess and why we're 
in here today discussing Bill 61, a Bill that is going to initiate in the 
province one of the biggest tax grabs in history.  I want to continue on 
with that argument and I want to bring out the facts as to why we are in 
this situation. 
 
I indicated yesterday some of the items that created the situation, created 
the tremendous debt that we now have in this province, accumulated debt in 
the neighbourhood of $5 billion.  And I indicated that we were . . . the 
taxpayers were paying $500 million a year just in the interest on that 
loan. 
 
I now want to turn to some of the other areas that I feel that created this 
tremendous debt, and of course it's the mismanagement and the waste that we 
have with the present-day government.  I want to touch on the dental 
program that we had in this province and the amount of money that was spent 
on buying all that equipment and putting it into the school systems to have 
a program that the citizens of this province wanted and deserve and still 



 

 

would like to have. 
 
There was millions of dollars went into the training of the dental nurses 
and the therapists and the dental assistants.  Over 400 of those young 
women were trained in this province at a tremendous cost, and that's the 
type of waste that we have. 
 
Not only do we have the waste of taxpayers' money to train them, but we 
have the human factor, the human destruction when all of a sudden the 
government decided that the program was no longer needed in this province 
and they decided that they were going to get rid of the 400-and-some dental 
nurses and dental therapists.  And that's the type of mismanagement that we 
have in this province today. 
 
And that's how that debt was created.  And that's why we're in here today 
discussing this large tax grab that we have here in Bill 61.  That's just a 
part of it. 
 
Another good example of the waste and mismanagement that has created this 
huge debt is the Highways department and the massive sell-off of the 
Highways equipment in this province.  We had an asset of over $40 million 
worth of Highways equipment, and that was just up and sold off for less 
than $6 million.  And the majority of that equipment was new equipment or 
equipment that was well-maintained, and it left the province.  And that's 
how we get into the types of messes that we're in in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Along with selling off of the Highways equipment, they decided that they 
were going to destroy another bunch of families and they announced that 
they were going to fire 200-and-some Highways workers, and that was done.  
The budget was brought in one day and then the next day the minister of 
Highways gets up and he announces that he's going to fire 230-some Highways 
workers.  And what he did, he literally destroyed the families.  And to me, 
Mr. Minister, that is a human disaster. 
 
And that human disaster has followed this government right from 1982 right 
through to the present day.  They have not stopped.  They have not stopped 
that attack on the citizens of this province.  They continually lay off 
civil servants, they continually cut programs, and no thought in mind of 
the families that are involved and the individuals who have those jobs and 
who have had those jobs for many years. 
 
I now want to turn to another situation where I think it is another human 
disaster and that was the sell-off of the Silver Lake farm in Green Lake.  
Mr. Minister, that is where a lot of taxpayers' money had gone for many 
years to build up that farm, to clear the land.  And all that land was 
cleared by the citizens of Green Lake.  Nobody else came in and done that.  
They cleared the land, they picked the roots, they picked the rocks, they 
built up that herd, they built the corrals, they built the buildings on the 
Silver Lake farm. 
 
And all of a sudden here we had a beautiful farm, it was operating well, 
and mainly run by the citizens of Green Lake.  Some of those individuals 
had worked up to 19 years on that farm. 



 

 

 
And then the government in their wisdom, through privatization, they 
decided they were going to sell the farm.  That's not a great problem.  But 
if they were going to sell the farm, why did they not sell it to the 
citizens of Green Lake?  They wanted that farm.  They still want that farm 
today, Mr. Minister.  And they could have run that farm.  The manager was 
from Green Lake. 
 
But no, no, this Conservative government, through waste and mismanagement, 
decided that they were going to bring in a farm manager from Shellbrook.  
And he came in there to manage the farm.  I believe he's still managing 
that farm.  And I don't think that he really came in there to manage the 
farm.  I think that was the type of waste of taxpayers' money so blatant, 
that individual came in there to set that farm -- the Silver Lake farm in 
Green Lake -- up for sale to the private entrepreneurs. 
 
So what did they do?  What did they do, Mr. Speaker?  The taxpayers' money 
that went in to building up that farm, the labour that was put in by the 
citizens of Green Lake . . . The citizens of Green Lake wanted to take over 
that farm and run it.  And there was approximately 2,000 head of pure-bred 
stock on that farm, and the land was all broke and cleared.  But no, they 
didn't sell it to the citizens of Green Lake.  They decided in their wisdom 
to sell it to three business men from outside of the community. 
 
And really, Mr. Speaker, to just show you how they have wasted the 
taxpayers' money here, all those assets should not have been sold.  That 
land, there is a caveat in place today and the Court of Appeal has upheld 
that caveat of Green Lake which indicates quite clearly that that land, the 
title for that land, cannot even be turned over.  And by the Minister of 
Agriculture, the Premier's own admission, he will not give out the 
information because he indicates that it's still in the courts.  And that's 
in writing; I have that in writing. 
 
So that land should not have been sold.  But what happened is when they 
turned it over in their lust to give this . . . to turn the assets over to 
some of their friends, right away they started to move off the assets.  It 
wasn't a week within moving into the Silver Lake farm that the three 
individuals who took over started to move that pure-bred stock off of the 
farm and started to sell it. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, that is all gone.  And that's why we're in here today 
discussing Bill 61, to get more money for the province of Saskatchewan, 
because of the fact that we're so far in debt because of the fact of the 
mismanagement of this Conservative government. 
 
That didn't end there, Mr. Speaker.  The caveat is against the Silver Lake 
farm.  The citizens of Green Lake, to the mayor and council, still lay 
claim to that land.  And yet this government still allowed the individuals 
to go ahead and sell off all the assets. 
 
In the last two, three weeks they had an auction sale and have cleaned out 
the farm completely -- all the machinery, all the tools from the shops -- 
everything has been sold at auction price.  And that is the type of a 



 

 

situation that we have in this province -- don't really care. 
 
The individual, the manager of the farm who'd been there for 19 years, 
getting close to retirement, at the top of the wage scale -- they just 
said, well that's it, you're laid off, you lose your job.  And he lost 
everything.  He lost everything, Mr. Speaker.  And other individuals from 
Green Lake who were also working on that farm, some of them up to 14 years, 
they were also given that same type of notice. 
 
(1045) 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a human disaster.  Because of the waste and 
mismanagement of the Conservative governments, we have the type of human 
disasters that we see in this province.  And coupled with the hardships 
now, they're going to have to pay all the extra taxes that we're dealing 
with here in Bill 61. 
 
And this is a tax, Mr. Speaker, that's never gone through the legislature.  
They've already implemented a number of items that they're already taxing 
and yet there's been no legislation passed in the legislature.  There's 
been no representation in the legislature from the four constituencies that 
have been vacant for, some of them up to just about two years.  And I think 
that that's the type of disrespect that this Conservative government has 
showed for the institution that we're in here today. 
 
They will go out and implement a large tax change such as Bill 61, starting 
to collect the taxes.  And one just has to go any place you want in this 
city, any place in the province and you see individuals who are continually 
saying, this has got to come to an end.  Enough is enough.  We just have 
too many taxes.  And they're hitting the poor people.  They're not hitting 
the Weyerhaeusers, as the Minister of Finance indicated today. 
 
Weyerhaeuser, who owes $236 million on the principal, hasn't paid 1 cent.  
The Minister of Finance has indicated that quite clearly today.  And that's 
why we're here today asking for more money from the citizens of 
Saskatchewan who cannot afford it, and yet we're not saying anything to 
Weyerhaeuser when they owe us $236 million.  That's why that Conservative 
government is in real trouble today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That's why the polls are indicating quite clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, that they are in trouble, because of the continual amount of taxes 
and tax increases that have been put on the citizens of this province.  
They're just coming steady. 
 
But yet you don't have to worry about Cargills, you don't have to worry 
about the Weyerhaeusers and the Peter Pocklingtons.  They look after the 
rich. 
 
And I want to get down to some of the other people that they look after, 
Mr. Speaker.  And I say to you, and I say to the members opposite, that 
they will pay dearly when they get up enough nerve to call the election.  



 

 

And I suspect that that has to come very soon.  And there are members over 
there who know full well what's going to happen, and they've got out.  They 
got out and they knew what was coming, and they got out in time. 
 
And I say that before the next election is called, you're going to see some 
other individuals over there who are having a hard time making the decision 
whether to run again or not, will be saying:  well I think it's time for me 
to get out and call it quits. 
 
Because they are going back to their communities, Mr. Speaker, and they 
have to face the individuals that I have to face, my colleague from 
Cumberland and everybody else has to face when we go back.  I'm getting it 
on a regular basis.  Individuals are telling me, they're phoning me up, 
they're saying, what is going on down there?  Why the continual increase in 
taxes?  We've just had too much of it. 
 
And I know that the members over there, and I know full well that my 
adjoining constituency of Meadow Lake, that that member has a big decision 
to make, whether he wants to be nominated again.  And I suggest that he's 
having a hard time also making that decision.  Because when I go into 
Meadow Lake, I get the same thing that he must be getting in the business 
community. 
 
I'll tell you the citizens in Meadow Lake and the business community, when 
I go in there, they say: what is going on down there?  This has to come to 
an end.  The business communities in Meadow Lake are suffering.  There are 
bankruptcies that are taking place in Meadow Lake; office spaces for rent 
in Meadow Lake.  And that never happened when we had things going good.  We 
had DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan) in northern Saskatchewan.  
And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the citizens of northern Saskatchewan, 
they paid millions of dollars in taxes into Meadow Lake and the business 
community there appreciated it. 
 
But now the citizens in northern Saskatchewan are finding it doubly tough.  
When you live in an isolated area and you have to drive so far, the high 
price of gas, taxes going up -- it's just something that can't happen.  And 
that is individual communities such as Meadow Lake who rely so heavily on 
my area in the Athabasca constituency.  They are suffering. 
 
And that's why I say, Mr. Speaker, that there are many Conservative members 
sitting on the other side who must be getting the same flak that I get and 
the same concerns must be expressed to them as are being expressed to me.  
And good Conservatives . . . I have talked to many good Conservatives and 
they say:  never again, I'm never going to vote Conservative again.  And I 
think that that's why you will see in the next short while, you're going to 
see a number of the Conservative members across there are going to announce 
that they will not seek re-election. 
 
First of all, they know that when the election is called and the votes are 
all counted, there will be very few Tories re-elected in this province.  
Very, very few.  There'll be very, very few, very, very few.  And the polls 
indicate that. 
 



 

 

Secondly . . . and I know the member from Lloydminster is getting lots of 
flak too up in his area, because he's in one of the border towns where they 
are suffering.  Let me tell you they are suffering because of the GST and 
the PST in this province and the policies of this government.  So he knows 
full well what's happening up there. 
 
And secondly, the ones that might be lucky enough to get back, I don't 
think really want to sit over here on the opposition side.  And I know the 
member . . . the Attorney General, he knows full well -- he sat over here, 
I watched him sit over here to the right of me and then I watched him make 
the move to the left of me; went from the Liberals to the Conservatives -- 
now he knows full well what's going to happen and he's decided that he 
won't run again.  And that's what's going to happen to many of them over 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to get back to the reason why we are really here today, 
discussing Bill 61, another large tax grab by this government.  And I want 
to touch on Weyerhaeuser again.  I touched on it today in question period.  
The Minister of Finance indicated that the Weyerhaeuser corporation has not 
paid 1 cent, not 1 cent, since 1986, on the $236 million capital that they 
owe the citizens of this province. 
 
One of the largest corporations in the world, Mr. Speaker, and they have, 
in this province, they have received from this province over 8 million 
acres of our prime forest land.  They have access to that.  They have 
access to a chemical plant in Saskatoon.  They've got the Big River saw 
mill and the pulp mill in Prince Albert. 
 
And to date, since 1986 when they took over and signed the agreement, they 
have not paid 1 cent of the $236 million they owe this province.  And the 
Minister of Finance today stood up in the House and he confirmed that they 
have not paid 1 cent.  And I have confirmation here also, and this here is 
up to May 8, that Weyerhaeuser has not paid 1 cent. 
 
Now here we are today debating Bill 61, a tax increase, one of the largest 
tax grabs in the history of this province, and who's going to pay for it?  
Every man, woman and child in this province has to pay for it, Mr. Speaker.  
Who doesn't have to pay for it?  Well, the Weyerhaeuser corporation of 
Tacoma, Washington, they don't have to pay for it.  They have our assets.  
They're selling all the lumber and the pulp and the chemicals but they 
don't have to. 
 
And this is the way they're operating.  This is why we're in such a mess 
today.  We're in such a mess.  And the Weyerhaeuser corporation, the annual 
reports, indicate the corporation is doing very well with annual profits, 
United States, as follows. 
 
And I just want to say, why should Weyerhaeuser not pay their fair share?  
We're asking every man, woman and child in this province to pay.  They're 
all paying the GST and the PST, and all the extra tax that are here.  But 
yet, Weyerhaeuser . . . and what was the profits of Weyerhaeuser, Mr. 
Speaker?  Well in 1985 they had $132 million profit.  In 1986 they had $180 
million profit.  And it keeps going up.  And I want to go to 1989, where 



 

 

they have $377 million profit -- the Weyerhaeuser corporation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there's no reason why a large corporation like that, who 
have access to a large amount of the resources in this province, should not 
be paying their fair share.  And yet the Minister of Finance gets up here 
today and he supports Weyerhaeuser.  He said Weyerhaeuser are doing a good 
job.  They don't have to pay their fair share. 
 
But every other man, woman, and child in this province have to pay their 
share.  They have to take the burden for the mistakes that were made by 
this government in signing agreements with the Weyerhaeuser corporation.  I 
say it's a bad deal and it's a deal that has to be stopped.  There has to 
be some rhyme or reason.  They have to start paying their fair share. 
 
I now want to turn to another group of people who are not paying their fair 
share and who are taking a lot of money out of this province, creating the 
debt that we have so that we're here debating another tax increase so that 
we can continue to pay.  And I want to talk about PCS (Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan Inc.) and the president of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While Saskatchewan men and women are becoming more deeply concerned about 
the lack of jobs and opportunities for ordinary people, the Conservative 
government has provided multi-year, no-cut contracts for its top executives 
and bureaucrats. 
 
We have a high unemployment rate in Saskatchewan.  We have many citizens in 
this province and in northern Saskatchewan who can't get a job.  And if 
they do get a job, Mr. Speaker, it's a welfare job.  It's a welfare job 
paid at minimum wage, work for 20 weeks, get laid off, then go on UIC 
(Unemployment Insurance Commission).  That's the type of mentality that 
this Conservative government has. 
 
But then they have other people, some of their friends -- not a Canadian, 
doesn't come from southern Saskatchewan, doesn't come from northern 
Saskatchewan, but he comes from the United States -- and he comes in here 
and he becomes the president of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what does he receive?  He doesn't receive minimum wage.  He doesn't 
work for 20 weeks and then get cut off and go on UIC.  No, he has 
guarantees.  Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, he has guarantees.  First of 
all, he gets $740,000 a year.  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, in all fairness, 
I don't believe anybody's worth $740,000 a year.  That is too much money. 
 
On top of that, he has a no-cut contract.  He can't be cut, can't be laid 
off.  If Mr. Childers becomes physically or mentally incapable of 
performing his job or dies during the term of the contract, he shall be 
paid compensation for the balance of the term of this agreement -- as if he 
had not been disabled or died. 
 
Now can you imagine any government signing a deal with a clause and an 
agreement like that?  First of all, you pay him $740,000 a year in wages.  
Then you have a no-cut contract, and then you put in there that even if he 



 

 

is disabled or died, you still have to pay out the contract. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why this government is so low in the polls.  That is 
why this province has gone from 1982, where we had a surplus of $139 
million, to a deficit today of $5 billion.  This is what's happened.  This 
is what's taken place, Mr. Speaker -- contracts like this to their friends, 
individuals who do not even live in this province . . . I mean do not even 
come from this province.  I say that that's a shame and that's why we're in 
the situation that we are today. 
 
And that's why we got into this situation.  And here, you know, this is the 
type of mentality.  That's why the present-day Premier of this province 
said in 1983: Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you can afford to 
mismanage and still break even.  That is exactly why we got into this 
trouble because they didn't realize it.  They just thought they could do 
anything.  They thought they could take and use the taxpayers' money and 
pay Chuck Childers $740,000 a year. 
 
That's why we have to have more tax in this province.  That's why we're 
debating this Bill in the House.  That's why . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- The minister indicated today quite clearly Weyerhaeuser 
hasn't paid 1 cent of the $236 million they owe us.  But yet we still need 
more money to operate the province and that's why we're in here discussing 
Bill 61 today -- to get more tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And that Minister of Finance has confirmed that today.  He 
confirmed it today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
think if the Minister of Finance would just let me finish my statement.  I 
let him finish his statement. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Would the member entertain a question, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: -- Would the member entertain a question? 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- After the election's over and I'm on that side of the 
House, then I'll entertain a question . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And I want to say, we're discussing Bill 61 today, and I'm 
going to close off, Mr. Speaker.  I know that the Minister of Finance has a 
burr under his saddle and is quite worried. 
 
I just want to close off, Mr. Speaker, by saying that this is why we're 



 

 

here today asking the citizens of this province to pay more taxes, taxes 
that they cannot afford.  But I say that the Weyerhaeusers of this world 
can afford to do that.  And I say in all fairness to the Minister of 
Finance who indicated quite clearly today that they have not paid 1 cent of 
the 236 million, that if they would pay their fair share, then we wouldn't 
need the type of Bill that we're discussing today.  They wouldn't need 
that. 
 
And if the Chuck Childers of this world were not paid $740,000 a year, plus 
all the perks, we wouldn't have to be in here today, Mr. Minister of 
Finance, discussing Bill 61, an increase in taxes.  We wouldn't have to do 
that.  All it is is some common sense and let's get it going.  And your 
Premier of today, the present Premier of the day also said deficits are 
just a deferred tax that must be paid by future generations with tax 
increases. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it's quite clear as to how we got into this mess, and I 
think it's quite clear to the citizens of this province how we can get out 
of this mess.  And the only way that that can be done, I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, after nine years . . . this government has failed, and they've 
failed dismally.  And I say the only way that we can do this is to have an 
election so that we can get a government over there that will make things 
equal, make everybody pay their fair share -- the Childers, the 
Weyerhaeusers, all those people have to pay their fair share -- not just 
the men and women and children of this province. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I close my debate.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to rise and 
speak on behalf of the Bill in the House.  I've listened to the member and 
the long bow that he's drawn in regards to the type of Bill that we see 
before us in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that if I go back as far as the member for Athabasca 
was in prior to 1982, when it was under his administration, I'd like to say 
that we've come a long way in this province.  I, for instance, can remember 
back in 1980 and '81 when people had approached me to run on their behalf 
in my riding.  And really, I think probably, if I can remember, I was going 
to be challenging the then minister of Highways under the NDP 
administration. 
 
And I remember the people in my particular riding saying to me, why can we 
not have natural gas in our small communities?  Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you, 
I'm going to give you an example, and I'll give you a personal example. 
 
I went into Lashburn, Saskatchewan, I moved to Lashburn, Saskatchewan in 
1979, and I had purchased the hotel there.  Because of the fact that there 
was no natural gas in the community . . . and that might be hard for some 
people to believe, anyway there was not such a thing.  In fact it wasn't 
even dreamt of having it in that community because they'd been told for so 
many years that there was not a chance of having it.  We did not have the 



 

 

reserve in this province to be able to even have natural gas in that 
community. 
 
Not only . . . when I began to look around I found out then, as the mayor 
of Lashburn, that there were other communities within that region as well.  
So when I took a look, here was Neilburg, Saskatchewan, in Marsden, 
Saskatchewan, in Maidstone, Saskatchewan -- all my communities now that I 
represent. 
 
Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, here we have had the then minister of 
Highways, Bob Long, an NDP with an NDP government, telling all those 
communities that there was no chance ever of them getting natural gas. 
 
Well all the mayors of that particular region had joined together, joined 
force.  We invited Mr. Long to a meeting in Lashburn, Saskatchewan, and he 
had once again reinforced with one of his officials, had reinforced it 
again with all the mayors present from all those communities, stating once 
again that it was not possible to have natural gas.  We did not take that 
as an answer, and from that moment on we took the march and we were 
determined to get natural gas in those communities. 
 
My personal experience was that that hotel was still being heated by a coal 
furnace -- yes, coal, Mr. Speaker. In the 1980s that particular facility 
when I had taken it over was still being heated by coal.  We had to shovel 
it into a stoker. 
 
I will say this much.  It wasn't that it wasn't good heat.  It was good 
heat of its time.  But that's the way it was back in Lashburn, Saskatchewan 
in 1980, just a short nine years ago. 
 
And now the member from Athabasca says, goes back and says that this 
administration has wasted money and has been mismanaging the people's 
moneys.  And we're here with an E&H (education and health) Bill discussing 
it in this legislature because of that waste and mismanagement and not 
everybody paying their fair share. 
 
Well I'll say, Mr. Speaker, that that is the most ridiculous accusation 
that I have ever, ever heard coming from that member, because usually that 
member is a fairly quiet member and is usually a very up front member and a 
guy that's not misled by untruths. 
 
But I believe honestly, Mr. Speaker, that that was not his own words, that 
he was reading from a speech that somebody else printed for him, had made 
up for him.  I won't say any more on that particular issue other than the 
fact is that when that member makes those kinds of statements that there is 
a mismanagement and a gross mismanagement of provincial funds, that is 
inaccurate. 
 
I'm going to say now, Mr. Speaker, that every one of those communities that 
I had particularly . . . that I have named, I should say, that did not have 
that natural gas in those communities . . . I was going to say, Mr. 
Speaker, through the government programs since we formed government in 
1982, and took the initiative to bring delivery of natural gas to, not only 



 

 

the rural communities, but almost to every farm across this province, Mr. 
Speaker.  That's what has been going on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the farmers can leave their farms, and they can take a break from their 
farm and they can go on a holiday or something, even in the winter, and not 
worry about maybe the fuel line freezing up from having to use fuel oil or 
. . . and it may sound very simple in a simplistic kind of way of 
describing something, but that's reality, Mr. Speaker.  There was a lot of 
farmers afraid to go on a holiday in the winter because of that fact, that 
their houses might freeze up, something might go wrong with the oil 
furnace, or something else like that. 
 
But now they don't, because we all know there are less parts on a gas 
furnace, and so there's less apt to go wrong.  And the SaskEnergy supplies 
the natural gas, keeps an eye on things, and you know there's just a lot 
less worry for rural individuals.  And I don't say that has been a waste of 
money.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, there's a lot of people with a lot of 
gratitude to this administration for getting behind this program and 
spending money and expanding on it.  And now you know . . . you see, Mr. 
Speaker, what that has done as well, it has expanded an industry in this 
province that we never did have. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that a lot of our members rightfully know now 
what natural gas exploration is doing in the province of Saskatchewan.  It 
is delivering to the province of Saskatchewan revenues that it's never had 
before, revenues that come back to the cumulative fund here in the province 
and help pay for programs. 
 
We are fortunate in this province to have less E&H tax here in this 
province than they do in many other provinces in this country.  I believe 
the only province that  
 Ddoes not have an E&H tax, Mr. Speaker, is the province of Alberta.  And 
we are probably one of the lowest E&H taxed provinces, other than that 
particular province that I'm talking about. 
 
So I like to kind of draw this picture, because I border Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, as you well know.  And I know the difficulties that are posed upon 
border communities, and everything else. 
 
But we learn to cope with things, Mr. Speaker, a lot, maybe more so than 
others.  And so we're getting there.  We've moved a long way and there is 
certainly some distance to move yet.  And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that 
through this administration, through this Progressive Conservative 
government, that that distance and that movement's going to take place. 
 
I don't think that everybody or anybody believes that everything has just 
got to happen overnight like that. And so I think probably we could work 
towards being patient in a lot of ways, and especially in this day and age 
when there's been a world economic, I guess probably crisis as you could 
say, because of the types of things that have happened. 
 
But you see when we're talking about a particular province, when we're 
talking about Saskatchewan, we're talking about I guess probably a province 



 

 

that relied so many, many, many years on agriculture. And I guess probably, 
if you will, it wasn't wrong to do that, and it still is not wrong to do 
that, to a degree. 
 
But I think even the farmers have come to realize and the people in rural 
Saskatchewan mainly, I think, have begin to realize that it's time to take 
a look within themselves and look around and say now look, what more can we 
do here in Saskatchewan to improve our existence here in Saskatchewan and 
to contribute back to this province, to keep our communities young and 
vibrant and viable, and to be able to carry on with the proud tradition 
that we've always had as rural Saskatchewanians, as well as the urban side 
of things. 
 
(1115) 
 
So I take a look at what's been going on in my particular riding and I will 
only speak in regards to my particular riding.  And I want to say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that you know, with that drive that they had going back to 
that natural gas drive, to achieve that, and then to get in saying okay we 
got this, now where do we go?  And you know what that's meant.  I'll say to 
the member from Moose Jaw that that natural gas, Mr. Moose Jaw, has meant a 
lot because what it has done is it has opened the community up for other 
people to move outside of the cities that had those kinds of services.  
They know now that they can get natural gas in a smaller community. 
 
When I speak of the communities that I've named, every one of those 
communities are beautiful communities in being able to offer people so much 
-- in fact as much maybe in some cases and more in others -- than 
individuals can maybe receive in large urban centres.  And that's debatable 
and argumentative, but in people's personal view of life and what they want 
for their families and everything else. 
 
But I say they've, in those communities I've named, they've got recreation 
facilities that our tax dollars have gone towards since our administration 
has come into government here in the province.  And we've got that in the 
sense of arenas, skating arenas for hockey and figure skating and carnivals 
of all nature.  We have curling rinks that have probably produced some of 
the most excellent, especially out of the young people, some of the 
greatest curlers in this province  
_- maybe across this country. 
 
And then we get into the point of our school and education facilities and 
the expansions that have taken place.  And that all comes from the E&H tax 
that we've collected in this province. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I look at my communities and look at the 
thankfulness in their eyes and the proudness of them walking down the 
street and saying: look, this is what we have in our communities and what 
we can offer.  Like I don't think we have one community in our riding since 
this government's come to power, since this Progressive Conservative 
government's come to power, Mr. Speaker, where we haven't delivered, if not 
a brand-new education facility, an addition to a existing facility because 
of the need and the growth in the population in my particular region. 



 

 

 
Now that has come about through diversification and through programs that 
this government has delivered.  So I say to you, sir, that when I hear 
members of the opposition bathing in the negatives again . . . and that's 
what they are doing, Mr. Speaker.  They've bathed in negatives.  They love 
bathing in negatives, Mr. Speaker, and it goes right back down to the story 
that I tell the folks back home, is that if you tell people daily, daily, 
daily, every day of your life, that there is nothing good in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, there are a great many people that may begin to believe that 
maybe there isn't. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that is because we do, yes, have 26 negative 
thinking people of the NDP caucus in this Chamber talking on negatives.  
They have over the years . . . have not credited this administration for 
any policy through the last nine years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, and they clap and chirp from their seats.  
But I will say this, Mr. Speaker, the 26 over there may not have, but I can 
remember in 1986, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, in our second term of office, had answered the question and 
had spoken positively for them and put us back here as a government. 
 
And I recognize that same, that same kind of flow is happening again, Mr. 
Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan, I'll tell you, have a real 
mind change on the fact of what the NDP have been trying to do and the 
mistruths and the misleading that they have been trying to put across in 
this province. 
 
I recognize that in my riding for this example, Mr. Speaker.  They have 
been coming into my riding for years now, you know, as opposition.  And 
they've been going into my riding and they've been trying to tell and 
convince the folks that they were not going to get hospitals, they were not 
going to get schools or nursing homes.  They were not going to get this and 
they were not going to get that. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, even during fairly tough economic times, sir, I 
want to say that this Progressive Conservative government has delivered on 
many, many, many, many types of projects throughout my riding, those very 
projects that those members opposite, the NDP opposite, had said they would 
never get. 
 
And that's what makes those people begin to think about the NDP and their 
attacks and their negativeness and all this.  And that's what we're talking 
about here today, Mr. Speaker, is the E&H, of what it means now to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We all recognize as individuals in this province that if essential services 
of government are to be delivered -- and I say this in education, health 
care, in shoring up agriculture and our industry across . . . and our 
social programs across this province -- that there is a much need to pay a 
tax, and everybody realizes that.  No one likes taxes.  I mean I don't like 



 

 

taxes.  I don't like taxes any more than the next person does. 
 
But I know if I want to be able to walk into a hospital, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that . . . and if I know that I'm not going to be just pulling out my 
wallet out of my pocket and having to pay out the dollar right there, I 
know in an indirect way, in an indirect way, this government has to achieve 
pulling in some dollars some way or fashion to pay the bill of that doctor 
or that nurse or that health-care worker of any nature.  I know that that 
bill is going to be paid and that person's going to be paid and that 
person's going to be able to not worry whether I am going to be paying the 
bill. 
 
I pay I guess probably through all the resources in . . . that we can 
expand upon in this province.  I would say that . . . and the more 
resources we can expand upon in this province will just exactly help that 
very thing, that very thing in being able to give me those many more 
services and expand . . . in the expansion on those services. 
 
So I guess probably we're talking about resource taxes and we're talking 
about income tax.  As you well know, Mr. Speaker, we're talking about E&H 
tax and we're talking about a freeze on income tax and taxes in general 
here in the province for the next three years. 
 
We have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, in this province now with the type of 
budget that has been presented in this House, we have an opportunity here 
to once now take a look around our ridings and say, yes, we are in a fairly 
comfortable situation in our ridings. 
 
I look at the member from Wilkie and what he's been able to do in his area 
and . . . well indeed all my members, you know.  Like they've been able to 
secure a fairly comfortable position in their ridings.  And now the people 
in their ridings have been saying, look, member from Wilkie, my good member 
from Wilkie, we're fairly well satisfied here and we can do maybe with a 
little bit less so we can catch up.  And that's what we're discussing here. 
 
We're discussing the fact is that health-wise facility, as far as 
facilities are concerned or services are concerned throughout rural 
Saskatchewan and larger urban Saskatchewan, all of Saskatchewan, that we're 
fairly well significantly secure. 
 
Education-wise as well.  We have beautiful facilities throughout this 
province and it's just been phenomenal, you know, the quality of education 
that we've been able to give our students in this province.  And members 
opposite say . . . they cry out that because tuition fees maybe have to 
rise a little bit and everything else.  And it is difficult.  It is.  It's 
tough when you have to have an increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe a member of mine would like leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I'd like to say thank you 



 

 

to my colleague from Cut Knife-Lloydminster for allowing me to introduce 
some guests to you, sir, and to the Assembly this morning. 
 
I have here today a group of 25 grade 4's from Midale school in Midale, 
Saskatchewan.  And I have the honour of introducing these students and 
their teacher and chaperons to the Assembly today on behalf of the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It may seem strange that the member from Thunder Creek would introduce 
students from Midale, but as the Energy minister for the province, Midale 
has a long history in our province as being a very significant oil centre.  
The Midale field, for the information of members of the legislature, has 
produced over a hundred million barrels of oil for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that's a very significant contribution to our economy 
since the early '50s. 
 
The students today are accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by their teacher Mrs. Anne 
Field; chaperons Mrs. Caroline Bunse, Mrs. Janice Vilcu, Mrs. Sharon 
Jacobson; and by the bus driver Mrs. Sandra Holman. 
 
And I would just wish the students a good trip today to Regina, and I know 
you've got other things to do.  And I hope that you enjoy the proceedings 
of the legislature and we'll give you some things to talk about when you go 
home and visit with your teacher and your parents. 
 
And I would ask all members of the legislature to help me welcome the 
students from Midale today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker.  It's nice to have the young 
people visiting the Assembly. 
 
I guess probably, Mr. Speaker, what I've been trying to say here in a short 
time is that I guess probably the Bill that we're discussing, the E&H tax 
Bill that we're discussing here is for the kinds of people that have been 
introduced, just the young people here and their futures in this province.  
And I guess probably, as us older people, we have to really take a look 
within ourselves and dig fairly deep to recognize the fact that it's no 
longer for us, Mr. Speaker, as it is more so for the younger people. 
 
And so I have no hesitancy in paying my fair share to this province and 
giving back my fair share to this province, be it through E&H tax or some 
other means, and I will do whatever I have to do to make this Saskatchewan 
a much better place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have indicated before, the member from Athabasca had 



 

 

been asking and suggesting that the money had been . . . where did all the 
money go?  He asked that question: where had all the money go in 
Saskatchewan under our administration?  And the member again asks again: 
where did the member . . . I mean, where did the money go?  So I want the 
member to pay close attention for just a few minutes, and I will tell him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, money went to agriculture: 78.5 million through the 
counselling assistance for farmer program; 107.9 million through the farm 
purchase program; 14.1 million through the feed grain adjustment program; 
203.8 million through the feeder association loan guarantee program; 12 
million in livestock facility tax credits; 43.7 million through the 
livestock investment tax credit program; $900,000 through the save our 
soils program; 58.5 million to the farmers' oil royalty program; 23.6 
million through the grasshopper control program; 8.3 million in irrigation 
assistance; 2 million through the livestock moving program; 63.4 million to 
the 1985 livestock drought assistance program; and Mr. Speaker, I could go 
on and on and on and on because there's just an unprecedented list of 
people. 
 
(1130) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina says:  what did that total -- 100 
million?  Mr. Speaker, if he'd have been paying attention, just the things 
that I've . . . is well in excess of 100 million, if you'd have been 
listening. 
 
But here's some more then if he wants it:  and there's $600,000 in the 
1982-83 drought relief; 3.8 million in assistance to the general 
agricultural programs; 10 million through the 1989 grain feed program; 
200,000 through the homestead rebate program; 16.2 million in fuel tax 
rebates; 39.1 million through the 1990 Canada-Sask crop assistance program; 
8.6 through the north-east flood control program; 244 million through the 
provincial stabilization payment program; 35 million through Sask Water 
supply program; 90.8 through provincial contributions through crop 
insurance; 30.3 million in ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation) capital 
loans interest subsidies; 67.9 million in production loan interest 
subsidies; 95.2 million in livestock cash advance interest subsidies; 3.5 
million in spring seeding program interest subsidies; and 442.2 million 
through the agricultural development fund, sir. 
 
And where did the money go again here, Mr. Speaker?  To economic 
diversification by Saskatchewan.  It has helped Saskatchewan firms secure 
over 253 millions in contracts and that's from all over the world, Mr. 
Speaker:  235.4 million equity fund funding for the Co-op heavy oil 
upgrader; 222 million for the Lloydminster heavy oil upgrader which the NDP 
are opposed to, Mr. Speaker, and they were opposed to the heavy oil 
upgrader here in Regina; 64 million for the Saferco fertilizer plant, sir, 
and the NDP are opposed to that; 201.3 million for the Meadow Lake hardwood 
pulp mill -- members of the opposition NDP are opposed to that; 8 million 
in financing through SEDCO for the Gainers bacon plant in the Battlefords 
-- the member for The Battlefords of the NDP is opposed to that; 2.1 
million financing from SEDCO for Great Western brewery in Saskatoon -- the 
members . . . the NDP are against that. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, this list goes on and on and on and on.  And there's been 
literally hundreds of millions of investment which have meant thousands of 
jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, under the hard, what we 
called -- and not just us as a government, but the people in the worldly 
economic picture if you will had called it -- a fairly significant hard 
economic condition throughout the world. 
 
And I want to say to you, sir, that through the toughest times in this 
province, through the toughest nine or ten years since the '30s that this 
province had to endure, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this province since 
we've taken over administration in 1982 . . . that there are still 40,000 
more people in this province and growing once again, and growing once 
again.  But there are 40,000 more people in this province than under the 
best years of the NDP. 
 
And yet the NDP have been talking about out-migration, Mr. Speaker.  Well 
my gosh, give us a break.  I mean I cannot believe it.  You know when they 
talk about these kinds of things, when you want to talk about 
out-migration, sir, where we have to look is in Ontario.  They're not just 
out-migrating back home into their own provinces, Mr. Speaker, but they're 
leaving the country from Ontario into the U.S. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to thank you for allowing me to take some of the 
time to express some of the things that have happened here in this 
province.  I've spoken on education.  I've spoken on health.  I think I've 
touched on agriculture and economic diversification.  I hope some of the 
members across the way would have listened so that when they are making 
some remarks that they could give the Progressive Conservative government 
some credit for a lot of the good things that have happened in this 
province. 
 
And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that I have never once, ever, ever 
have gone out into my riding and even under the Allan Blakeney days of the 
NDP have ever indicated in my riding that they did not do some good things. 
 
And I'd say, Mr. Speaker, that regardless of your  
 Dphilosophical beliefs, that there are many good things that are 
happening.  Around those folks -- those NDP members in this legislature 
that have the blinders on -- there are many good things that have happened 
around them if they would just open their eyelids and take a look and quit 
being so negative. 
 
But I say this, I'll be taking my seat in a moment here.  But I'll give you 
this guarantee, Mr. Speaker, from all the good things that I've been able 
to point out and that the Minister of Finance and his cabinet and our 
Premier and his cabinet have been able to do in this government, I'll give 
you this guarantee -- that the next speaker that would stand in this House 
will definitely, Mr. Speaker, be right back into that negative trough and 
bathing in it with great glee and try to, I guess, demoralize the efforts 
that have been placed in this great province of ours. 
 
I always thought to myself, Mr. Speaker, that if things are so tough as the 



 

 

members opposite have always portrayed it to be, you know, Mr. Speaker, 
it's a wonder that they haven't gone behind some building and maybe did 
something to themselves.  Because I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, if I had to get up 
every morning in a negative mode as they do, I wouldn't be able to live 
with myself let alone anyone else.  I guess the problem . . . maybe it 
might be . . . or one might want to start questioning whether you want to 
even be here. 
 
But I guess those folks figure it's not that bad a place.  I've heard some 
of the, I guess, people make some of the remarks about some of the terrible 
things, but I hope when they look at it and they go down and talk about 
education and what is happening in education here and agriculture, you 
know, try to get a real honest grasp on it and get out of the trough.  And 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank you once again for recognizing 
me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloyd has just indicated to everyone in the Legislative Assembly that 
speakers on this side of the House are going to be negative.  And I guess 
if standing in my place and fighting with all my might against the Tory 
provincial goods and services tax that's going to be an additional 7 per 
cent on my constituents, if that's negative, I guess I'm proud to be 
negative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, what is happening in Saskatchewan in the tourist 
industry is certainly negative.  We're trying to prevent the lack of people 
coming into our province.  And the reason of course that people would not 
come into our province is this Bill we're debating today, Bill 61, which is 
an expansion of the education and health tax, the 7 per cent E&H tax which 
is going to be making purchases of goods and services in Saskatchewan much 
more expensive than they currently are. 
 
And of course once you get a reputation of being an expensive place, people 
no longer look to Saskatchewan as a place to come and visit, and that will 
put many hundreds if not thousands of Saskatchewan people out of work. 
 
As you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are well aware, there is a great deal of 
Saskatchewan that is very worthy of people coming to see.  We've got a 
beautiful province, very diverse.  Literally anything that you wish to look 
at you can find in our province.  There is a lot that Saskatchewan has 
going for it.  Unfortunately this tax is not one of the things that is 
going to be a positive thing. 
 
So I guess if I'm viewed as being negative to fight against this imposed 7 
per cent goods and services tax in Saskatchewan, so be it.  I'll let, 
certainly, my constituents be the judge of that, and in fact I think the 
people of Saskatchewan will be judging that, certainly within the next five 
months.  There's been some considerable talk about it being four years and 
seven months since the last election.  A normal term of government is some 



 

 

four years.  So they're seven years past the mandate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is all about taxes, tax increases, corruption 
of the public trust, and mismanagement of the public purse.  It's about 
incompetence and it's about a lack of direction from the government to the 
people of Saskatchewan.  The government has no mandate to be forcing this 7 
per cent E&H tax in the form of a goods and services tax -- it will also 
include services.  And I merely point out some advertising done prior to 
the 1982 election where the promise was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What did they say? 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Well what did they say?  The member for Cut Knife-Lloyd, the 
current member, says: we'll provide a 10 per cent reduction in provincial 
income tax.  Well the 10 per cent reduction has resulted in a 2 per cent 
flat tax on all income, it has resulted in increases in the provincial tax 
rate for individuals.  We've seen an increase of some 93 per cent in the 
taxes paid by individuals in Saskatchewan since this promise of a 10 per 
cent reduction in income tax. 
 
The second promise, the second major plank of the now government, was phase 
out the sales tax.  And it varies from ad to ad, from simple phase out to 
an immediate reduction and elimination within the first term of government.  
And of course the record speaks quite the opposite.  The E&H tax that they 
were going to eliminate represented 5 per cent on goods -- on most goods in 
the province a 5 per cent E&H tax. 
 
Well I guess the government could argue that they did eliminate the 5 per 
cent E&H tax.  The unfortunate part is they replaced it with a 7 per cent 
E&H tax, which represents a 40 per cent increase in one swoop -- 40 per 
cent increase in the E&H tax -- which as you would know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is one of the major sources of funding for the provincial 
government. 
 
But this Bill would not be necessary if we had a government that could live 
within its means, if we had a government that could make astute business 
deals, if we had a government that, for example, earlier in question period 
today, my colleague was asking questions about the Weyerhaeuser deal -- 
$236 million agreed to purchase price.  Nobody disputes that that's the 
agreed purchase price.  But we find now, after five years of Weyerhaeuser 
having taken over -- walked in and taken over the pulp mill -- after five 
years we find, or confirm, that there still has not been one penny paid on 
the interest on that $236 million agreed to purchase price. 
 
(1145) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's a pretty good deal for Weyerhaeuser, and I 
take my hat off to them for recognizing a good deal and taking it when they 
could.  But it's not a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan.  There's 
$236 million that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are carrying as a debt.  We 
are carrying all of the interest costs on that.  And because of that, the 
provincial debt keeps going up, the costs of interest keeps going up.  
Because Weyerhaeuser hasn't paid for that plant, we are now in a situation 



 

 

where the Minister of Finance has introduced a Bill that is going to expand 
the 7 per cent E&H tax onto services as well. 
 
The sad part is that I don't believe this new tax is going to generate the 
moneys that the Minister of Finance has told us to accept, in a leap of 
faith, that it will generate.  And I say this for the simple reason that 
border shopping has expanded in the last couple of years.  But particularly 
in the last few months, border shopping has really expanded.  And now we 
have a situation where people who previously made purchases in Saskatchewan 
are going into Alberta or into North Dakota where they can avoid paying 
this 7 per cent tax grab. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that people are leaving not nearly so much 
because of the untold hundreds or thousands of dollars that they may or may 
not save, I think that instead they're trying to send a message to that 
Minister of Finance, that what they're trying to say is they believed him a 
year ago when he said about taxes in this legislature, enough is enough. 
 
And when he said enough is enough, they desperately wanted to believe that 
that was the new state of the Conservative government.  People of 
Saskatchewan wanted to believe.  They'd been hit with tax increase after 
tax increase after tax increase.  They wanted desperately to believe that 
Minister of Finance when he said enough is enough. 
 
Now the minister has crossed the divide with this Bill 61, which is the 
first step of the harmonization of the E&H tax with the federal goods and 
services tax.  The Minister of Finance has crossed the divide.  The people 
of Saskatchewan that are able to are making increasing number of purchases 
outside of our province, partly to save some money but largely to send a 
message to the Minister of Finance that says, you can impose a tax on us 
but if there's a way that we can legitimately get around it, we will. 
 
And if it means spending $30 on gas to save $30 on E&H tax, we'll do it as 
a point of principle.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is where a great 
number of Saskatchewan people have come to the conclusion they don't want 
to pay unfair taxes. 
 
People of Saskatchewan, I think in the main, Mr. Speaker, are very proud of 
the fact that we have health care, education, roads provided, a great 
number of government services, and we all understand there is a need for us 
to each pay our share of taxes.  There's a great need for that to take 
place.  Governments cannot operate on air.  But when a government gets too 
greedy, gets too out of step with the people, they face a tax revolt, the 
likes of which we are seeing today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the restaurateurs of Saskatchewan are also very much 
hit by this new tax grab.  They were hit January 1 with the 7 per cent 
federal GST that they had to add to their prices or swallow in their 
margin.  But they have to remit 7 per cent of the value of the goods and 
service, the total price they must charge, to the federal government.  Now 
they're being asked to submit an additional 7 per cent GST to the 
provincial government.  That makes a 14 per cent increase in five months.  
It was actually in four months when this Bill was introduced. 



 

 

 
Customers, if I can be so bold as to say people such as myself, who have a 
certain income and it's . . . like my income is a given amount.  Previously 
I may have spent, for simplicity's sake, let's say I spent 5 per cent of my 
income on restaurant meals.  Now we have a provincial GST imposed on a wide 
variety of things that I purchase, including natural gas and electricity, 
including clothing, and including gum, candy, a great number of things, dog 
food -- a great number of things now I have to pay an additional 7 per cent 
for to the provincial government.  And that means that out of my finite 
amount of income I maybe can't spend 5 per cent on restaurant meals now.  
Maybe I've had to cut it back to 3 per cent. And maybe part of it, for the 
Minister of Finance, is that I don't want to pay the tax to him, and 
instead I have chosen to take more meals at home. 
 
Now I used myself in this illustration but that story can be repeated far 
and wide throughout Saskatchewan.  Go to any restaurateur, ask them if 
their business is up or level or down.  You will be very, very hard pressed 
to find any of them that aren't saying, this tax is devastating them.  This 
tax is causing them to lay off staff, or in the failure of laying off 
staff, they are bringing in their part-time people who maybe worked 30 
hours previously, are working 14 hours now. 
 
So the hours that the employees in the restaurants were working are being 
cut.  Their income is being cut.  And their ability to make any purchase, 
their ability to simply keep food on their table, to keep a roof over their 
heads is being eroded.  That is what this tax is all about. 
 
You're taxing the people that have said, enough is enough.  They're very, 
very clear about that.  And, Mr. Speaker, I wish that the Minister of 
Finance would get clear about that and withdraw this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at the government's record and I have to ask myself why 
would any Saskatchewan person ever believe what the government says.  I see 
a government that got elected with two major promises.  They promised they 
were going to provide home mortgage protection plan.  That mortgage 
protection plan has been changed at least four times subsequently and 
nobody in Saskatchewan believes with certainty that this  
 Dgovernment won't tinker with it again.  Nobody believes they won't tinker 
with it again.  The current subsidy, if I might call it that, is nearly 30 
per cent higher than what the lending institutions are charging for 
mortgages today.  Now that's some subsidy.  The lenders will charge 11 per 
cent and the mortgage subsidy is in excess of 13 per cent.  It's a strange 
thing. 
 
And it reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of when I was at the Pool farm service 
centre in Outlook.  As you know, the Wheat Pool is a major supplier of farm 
supplies throughout Saskatchewan.  I had a farmer come in one day and said, 
I want six pails of 2,4-D, ester 128.  I said, that's fine. Six times I 
think it was $45 a five-gallon can we were selling it in those days -- gave 
him the price. 
 
And he says, well but X across the street is selling it for $30.  You're 
asking $45.  I said to the farmer, why don't you go and buy the 2,4-D from 



 

 

X across the street?  The farmer says, well he's out of it; he doesn't have 
any.  And I said, well as soon as we're out of it our price won't be $45, 
we'll charge $20 a pail once we're out of it. 
 
And that's kind of like this mortgage protection plan for the people now.  
Now that interest rates are lower, the mortgage protection is higher, and 
there's no benefit in it to people who are renewing their mortgage today. 
 
And as I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, the mortgage protection plan has been 
changed some four times.  The people of Saskatchewan are saying, how can we 
trust this government to leave it alone?  Never mind make it a workable 
mortgage protection plan, how can we trust them to leave it alone? 
 
The second reason that the people of Saskatchewan would perhaps distrust 
the members opposite is on relating to their other major election platform, 
and that was to eliminate the gas tax.  Now there was a 6 cent a litre gas 
tax in 1982, and it certainly was eliminated briefly.  Then it was brought 
back.  Then we got half of it back.  And now we don't get anything back and 
the tax is now 10 cents a litre, which represents again a 40 per cent 
increase.  From 6 cents a litre to 10 cents a litre, despite the promises 
of the members opposite that there would never be a gas tax in the province 
of Saskatchewan as long there was a Conservative government. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's just curious to me how after so many flips 
with respecting to taxation issues, that the members opposite could even 
remotely expect the people of Saskatchewan to believe them ever again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after nine years of the financial mismanagement of 
Saskatchewan, we simply have come to the conclusion, the people of 
Saskatchewan have come to the conclusion we can't afford four more years of 
the present government -- four more years of this waste and this 
mismanagement, this deceit, this flip-flop with respect to taxation.  We 
cannot afford it any more. 
 
It's because of the waste, because of the mismanagement, and because of the 
lack of direction, lack of purpose of the present government, that we are 
now in a situation where here we are, May 10, 1991, in the Legislative 
Assembly trying to stop a 7 per cent provincial goods and services tax from 
being passed.  We're trying to stop it.  Government members are so 
desperate for revenue that they're busy trying to impose yet another new 
tax on the people of Saskatchewan, the people who've said, enough is 
enough. 
 
It's simply unbelievable that we would find ourselves in this predicament 
four years and seven months since the last election.  I'd like to see the 
government go out and campaign, call an election and campaign and say, vote 
for us and we'll give you a 7 per cent provincial GST.  Love to see that 
happen. 
 
I heard some minutes ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member who spoke 
previously for Cut Knife-Lloydminster was talking about the 1986 election 
and how the people of Saskatchewan had favoured the government with a 
mandate to vote . . . and I've no quarrel, they've got more members in the 



 

 

seat in the Legislative Assembly right now than what the opposition has, 
the New Democrats.  There is no question, they had won that election.  
There is no question, they had won that election.  The member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster was saying, and the people of Saskatchewan will do that 
again.  Well I'd like the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster to just talk to 
the Premier and get the election under way.  It's been four years, seven 
months.  If they're so sure, let's go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Increasingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are finding government 
members that are so, if I can use the word, shell-shocked from what is 
happening with respect to this provincial GST, they're now resorting to 
deceit, they're now trying to purport what the NDP position is.  And I can 
tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are quite capable of stating what our 
position is.  Our position is we are opposed to this provincial goods and 
services tax and we are going to do everything we can that is within our 
powers to prevent the passage of this Bill which is the first step towards 
the harmonization and the introduction of the provincial GST. 
 
Instead of trying to sell the people of Saskatchewan on what their position 
is, they're busy trying to purport what our position is.  And I tell the 
members opposite we're quite capable of speaking for ourselves, we are very 
clear what our position is, we're going to defeat this Bill in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I look at actions of the government and what has 
been the results.  I'm not going to spend a great deal of time on this but 
I see food bank 1983 set up in Regina and it served some 1,684 adults and 
1,970 children.  And then it has simply mushroomed every year until 1990 
when they served 37,000-plus adults and 36,000-plus children.  A food bank, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a food bank that would be unnecessary if we had a 
government that could manage its own finances and would not put the 
taxation on the backs of regular people. 
 
If instead of spending $238 million in a gift to Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington, if instead of spending $113 million, giving away a coal-mine 
that we developed through SaskPower to Manalta Coal of Alberta, if instead 
of giving Cargill $69 million to build a fertilizer plant -- if instead of 
that this government had spent some effort on paying attention to people, 
if this government had spent even a portion of that effort on people, we 
wouldn't be in a situation where they're desperately looking for more 
money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I've just talked about some of the gifts, some of 
the largess this government has used in major corporations.  I want to tell 
the opposite side what has happened, what the impact of welfare reform has 



 

 

been on the purchasing power of SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) 
entitlements. 
 
Single employable people from 1981 until 1988 have lost 54 per cent of 
their purchasing power -- down from $581 to, in constant dollars, $268 in 
1988.  Never mind using constant dollars, in dollar bills it went from 581 
to $375.  For a single parent with two children, the loss of purchasing 
power has been some 30 per cent.  For two parents with two children, again 
the loss has been 29 per cent. 
 
This unfairness has been perpetrated on the people of Saskatchewan while 
Weyerhaeusers and Cargills and Manalta Coals and Peter Pocklingtons reap 
the largess out of the public treasury. 
 
One of the things that shows up too is the number of appeals of decision by 
the Department of Social Services.  And again I compare from 1982 to 1989.  
And I see that the appeal to the local appeal panels has gone from 200 to 
950 -- more than a fourfold increase; the appeals to the provincial board 
from 40 to 164 -- again more than a 400 per cent increase. 
 
Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  It is simply because of the largess of this 
government, the largess to the multinational corporations, the willy-nilly 
give-away of the resources of Saskatchewan, and at the same time the 
putting the thumbs to the regular people of Saskatchewan.  Telling people 
your food isn't important, your residence isn't important -- all kinds of 
money for the corporations, nothing for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We see taxes being piled upon us, taxes upon taxes upon taxes.  And what 
about Weyerhaeuser?  No taxes.  Heavens, they can't even begin to pay the 
$238 million that they've owed us for close to five years now. 
 
So taxes on regular people, gifts to the big multinationals.  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is a shame and that is why we're standing in the Legislative 
Assembly today, debating this Bill, and we're trying to do everything we 
can to prevent this yet another tax grab by a government that has seen its 
spending absolutely run rampant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- We've seen the spending far outstrip the income of the 
government.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's not because the income of the 
government has not grown rapidly.  Quite the contrary.  In the past nine 
years we have seen more tax grabs.  Home owners have lost their $230 
property improvement grant.  Two hundred and thirty dollars for a home 
owner may not sound like a huge amount of money.  But I remind you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it is $230 every year -- $230 every year.  And it adds up, 
it adds up. 
 
Every home owner, $230; every renter, $115 a month.  What could you do with 
that money if you weren't paying for it in taxes just to keep this 
government afloat, just to keep the deficit somewhere within reason.  But 
instead we see a fertilizer plant being built just west of town, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  We see $69 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money being 



 

 

fronted, and we see more money being guaranteed for that fertilizer plant. 
 
Now one thing that a great many people have forgotten is that this isn't 
the first fertilizer plant that the province of Saskatchewan, that the 
taxpayers, have helped to build.  There was another one built in the 1960s 
when the Thatcher Liberal administration was in power.  That facility is 
still standing just west of Regina.  That facility, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 
built as a fertilizer plant.  It actually operated for three years and some 
months.  That fertilizer plant lost money on every ton it produced, every 
single ton.  That fertilizer plant that was built in the mid-'60s cost a 
fraction of what this Cargill fertilizer plant is going to cost now.  The 
taxpayers put up, as a result, a fraction of the millions of dollars that 
they are putting up for this Cargill fertilizer plant. 
 
I look around now and I see a farm economy that is in crisis.  And I have 
to ask myself, how is it that the Government of Saskatchewan would risk 
nearly $70 million of cash from the provincial treasury, $70 million cash 
to build a fertilizer plant, when at the same time, the largest 
co-operative in Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, has got not one, 
but two fertilizer plants moth-balled because they can purchase cheaper 
than they can manufacture? 
 
So while we have plants shut down, owned one-third by Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, while we have those plants in Calgary and Lethbridge shut down, while 
that is happening, we've got $70 million being invested on a pig in a poke 
-- $70 million of taxpayers' money that is being put out at risk, that I 
would be really shocked if we ever see that money back. 
 
At the time that this government is putting out $70 million for a 
fertilizer plant, giving it to Cargill, Cargill Grain which has an annual 
budget that is 11 times larger than the province of Saskatchewan's annual 
budget -- I mean 11 times stronger . . . Mr. Speaker, Cargill should be 
guaranteeing the province of Saskatchewan's debt, not vice versa.  But at 
the time they're spending $70 million, we've got a crisis situation on our 
hands right now. 
 
We've got nurses walking the picket line as I speak.  We've got beds closed 
in hospitals.  We've got patients turned away.  We've got a major crisis, 
and it is all to do with the choices that this government has made, the 
choices they have chosen. 
 
Instead of health care, they have chosen Cargill.  Instead of nurses, 
they've chosen Weyerhaeuser.  Instead of the people of Saskatchewan, 
they've chosen their multinational friends who give them the big corporate 
donations to fund their PC (Progressive Conservative) political propaganda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- And now we get it again, Mr. Speaker.  Now we get it again.  
Now we get the people of Saskatchewan having to pay a 7 per cent goods and 
services tax because that government chooses to look after its corporate 
friends instead of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

That's a shame.  That's why we're fighting this Bill.  That's why we will 
fight this Bill with everything we got.  That's why I'm proud to be a New 
Democrat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I talked about health care, the crisis.  And I 
just want to . . . I see a note here that talks a bit about some of this 
crisis.  I see that the numbers of workers has declined.  Percentage of 
health-care workers in Saskatchewan working part time has gone . . . Yes, 
all of the numbers have declined in every . . . it looks to me like in 
every year under this administration. 
 
We see fewer and fewer people providing the services; fewer people 
providing the services because the funding levels aren't there.  The 
choices that this government has made are choices not of the people but 
choices of their big corporate friends. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Right.  Who calls the shots here? 
 
Mr. Trew: -- The question that some might ask is: who is calling the shots 
here?  Who is it?  Is it the people?  Are they saying: oh, give us a 7 per 
cent goods and services tax; we want to pay more tax? 
 
I think it's more likely the banks.  The bond dealers happen to be exempt 
from this provincial GST.  Isn't that interesting?  I wonder how much that 
cost them in political donations. 
 
I wonder if books and reading materials are exempt.  We know the answer.  
We know it, Mr. Speaker, because there is no shortage of people in 
opposition to it.  We know it, Mr. Speaker, because there is an Alliance 
Against Tax on Reading who's done some very good work in recent times, and 
they have come up with all kinds of fighting.  They've come up with 
thousands and thousands of signatures on petitions opposing this tax on 
reading material. 
 
But they've also generated a fair amount of interest in the media: GST tax 
on learning, says U of S (University of Saskatchewan) librarian.  "Don't 
tax reading," says an editorial from the Star-Phoenix, March 6.  "Book 
Alliance to meet Hepworth," Friday, March 8.  We know the result of that -- 
no backing down at all.  In fact the next headline, March 13, "Hepworth 
won't back down, reading will be taxed," according to the headline.  Here's 
from the Star-Phoenix April 6, "Reading made pastime of the wealthy".  Well 
isn't that interesting -- reading made now a pastime of the wealthy. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the alliance against the taxation on reading material has 
pointed out quite correctly that a full-time university student in 
Saskatchewan will be paying nearly $200 per year tax under this tax that 
we're debating today - 
_ nearly $200 a year.  Now that's just to purchase books -- that on top of 
tuition increases that have ranged from a low of 17 per cent to a high of 



 

 

something in excess of 50 per cent in a couple of the colleges, and a 
quota. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, where is the fairness in Saskatchewan -- when you see 
people trying to get an education, trying to improve themselves for the 
future, trying of course to enhance their earning ability by making 
themselves worth more to the people of Saskatchewan -- Mr. Speaker, where 
is the fairness in that when we see a provincial GST imposed on students, 
on people who read, imposed on people of Saskatchewan.  And at the same 
time we see the multinationals benefitting from the largess of the 
treasury. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal . . . or some more to say about this 
issue but I'd like to consult with some of my constituents, and with that I 
move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 12:17 p.m. until 12:56 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Shillington Hagel t 
 Lingenfelter Calvert t 
 Simard Trew t 
 Kowalsky Van Mulligen t 
 Goulet t 
-- 9 R 

Nays 
 
 Muller Gerich t 
 Schmidt Swenson t 
 Klein Britton t 
 McLeod Sauder t 
 Lane Toth t 
 Hepworth Duncan t 
 Hardy Gleim t 
 Kopelchuk McLaren t 
 Petersen Baker t 
 Wolfe Swan t 
 Martens Muirhead t 
 Hopfner Johnson t 
 Martin Saxinger t 
-- 26 R 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill is all about 
choices.  Choices this government could have made, and this government 
chose the wrong choices at every turn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- This Bill is talking about a tax grab, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill 



 

 

is talking about a 7 per cent provincial goods and services tax on the 
people of Saskatchewan on top of all of the other tax grabs introduced by 
the government members opposite since 1982 until now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- The choices have been wrong.  The choices have been 
consistently wrong.  That's why we're fighting this particular Bill.  We're 
opposed to a 7 per cent provincial goods and services tax and we're going 
to beat it.  We're going to do everything we can in the legislature to 
defeat that Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Some of the choices, Mr. Speaker, have been to give 
Weyerhaeuser $238 million, to give Cargill nearly $70 million, to give 
Rafferty and the mud flats, I'm not sure how much, but many millions of 
dollars. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a commitment to you and to members of 
this Legislative Assembly here today, a serious commitment, that should I 
be blessed with re-election in my constituency, I am going to be pushing 
for the renaming of the Rafferty dam.  I want it to be called Devine dam 
and Berntson flats, so that the mud flats can be for ever honouring the 
former member from Souris-Cannington, Senator Berntson.  Devine dam and 
Berntson flats has a nice ring to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That same senator that went to Ottawa, why did he leave to Ottawa in a 
rush?  It was to pass the federal goods and services tax, the tax that 
members opposite said:  oh, we're opposed to a federal goods and services 
tax.  But when there's a chance for a sweetheart position for one of 
theirs, what do they do?  Flip-flop.  All of a sudden the federal goods and 
services tax is all right, consequences to the people of Saskatchewan be 
hanged. 
 
Well we say that's not good enough.  That's their way; it's not our way.  
Mr. Speaker, we are opposed to this Bill because of all that it represents, 
the wrong choices having been consistently made by government members 
opposite, and we will continue to fight it. 
 
Some of the other choices, Mr. Speaker.  The Department of Highways has 
been decimated.  We've seen over $40 million worth of Highways equipment 
auctioned off for a fraction, a small fraction of its value, and we are 
suffering the consequences daily.  Members will appreciate this as this 
legislature adjourns in the next few hours.  Members will appreciate it as 
they're bouncing their way home on what we call highways in Saskatchewan 
now.  Except of course, Mr. Speaker, for the cabinet ministers who will be 
flying in the airplane.  They don't have to endure the highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the choices have been consistently wrong.  Manalta Coal gets a 
$113 million gift of a coal-mine.  They got the coal; the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan got the shaft. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, you can't possibly continuously give away 
millions upon millions upon millions of dollars to the corporations, to the 
multinationals such as Cargill that has an annual budget 11 times larger 
than the Government of Saskatchewan, you can't possibly do that and still 
think you're going to come through with this tax.  We are going to be 
continuing to fight that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time is drawing on.  I wish to consult my constituents over 
the weekend before concluding my remarks on this.  I move to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:05 p.m. 
 


