





























































Hansard: May 27, 1991


 

 

May 27/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 

 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to continue the presentation of 
petitions in this legislature.  I'm pleased to lay on the Table a petition 
from several Prince Albert and area citizens.  These people have exercised 
their democratic right to sign a petition in this province, and through me 
as a member of the legislature, I'm pleased to present this petition to all 
members of the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the people of 
Prince Albert and area.  Mr. Speaker, these folks have taken their 
democratic opportunity to sign the petition.  This petition, as you know, 
Mr. Speaker, is opposed to the provincial goods and services tax. 
 
These people live in neighbourhoods such as 8th Street East in the city of 
Prince Albert.  They come from the rural community of Birch Hills.  These 
folks also reside on 15th Street West, P.A., Knox Place, Central Avenue, 
7th Street East.  Here's a person, Mr. Speaker, that comes from the rural 
part of Prince Albert and area.  They also live on 3rd Street; 29th Street; 
one citizen hails from Bellevue, Saskatchewan; 22nd Street West, Prince 
Albert; River Street East.  Mr. Speaker, there's a person here that's 
signed the petition from Duck Lake.  As well, Mr. Speaker, there are some 
other folks that come from 4th Street East in P.A.; 15th Avenue East, Mr. 
Speaker.  Many of these folks look as though they are senior citizens.   
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to present this petition to the legislature 
on behalf of all of these signatories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that I want to lay on 
the Table.  These people come from rural Saskatchewan.  We have people 
signing the petition from Watrous, Humboldt, Melville, Young, and, Mr. 
Speaker, there are several signatories from Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are exercising their democratic right to sign a 
petition in the province of Saskatchewan, and as an elected member of the 
legislature I am pleased to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that I'm pleased to 
put on the record.  There are several signatories from the town of Young, 
as well as Guernsey, Watrous, Simpson.  And, Mr. Speaker, there's one 
signatory on this petition from Regina.  These folks are exercising their 
democratic right to sign a petition in the province of Saskatchewan, and as 
an elected member of the legislature I am extremely privileged to lay this 
petition on the Table. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have one last petition signed by several people who live in 
the Watrous, Kamsack, and Young area.  As well, there are two people that 
have signed this petition from the city of Regina.  These people are 
exercising their democratic right to sign a petition in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  This is their way of putting their views on the record, and 
they've done so by signing this petition, Mr. Speaker.  And once again I am 
pleased to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to 
rule 11.  The petitioners that I will be presenting have asked me on their 
behalf to speak to the government in regards to the goods and services tax 
which we are debating in the legislature. 
 
These people, Mr. Speaker, according to the petition that has been signed 
by them, and the prayer, clearly indicate that they do not agree with the 
increases that will take place should this legislation pass, and by signing 
this petition have strongly put a message to the government that the Bill 
should not pass and should be withdrawn.  On their behalf, Mr. Speaker, I 
am very pleased to present their petitions. 
 
The first one that I will present this evening, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Saskatoon, mainly, Mr. Speaker, from my constituency.  I recognize 
many of the names that are on this particular paper.  They are from areas 
such as Cairns Avenue in Saskatoon, Taylor Street, Broadway Avenue, Munroe 
Avenue, Hilliard, Morgan Avenue, and Michener Street, York Avenue, and 
Dufferin.  Also, Mr. Speaker, a petitioner from 12th Street.  On behalf of 
those people who've signed this petition I am very pleased to present it to 
the legislature. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, and this one comes from the 
other . . . from the extreme south-east of the province, in the 
constituency of the Premier, from the city of Estevan.  Again, Mr. Speaker, 
these people have indicated their opposition to Bill 61 and have asked the 
opposition, on their behalf, to present the petition to the legislature 
which, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased and privileged to do.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here which comes from the northern 
part of our province, from the city of Prince Albert.  Again, Mr. Speaker, 
the people have signed this petition in opposition to Bill 61, and they 
have indicated to us they want us to present their views to the government 
which we are doing by tabling these petitions.  They are also . . . there's 
a person who has signed this from Wakaw and from St. Louis, as well as the 
city of Prince Albert.  On behalf, Mr. Speaker, of these people, I am very 
pleased to present the petition to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here and again it is from the 
constituency of the Premier, from Estevan, but not exclusively from 
Estevan.  We have also a signer from the village of Midale.  Again, Mr. 
Speaker, these people are using their democratic right in signing this 
petition and asking the opposition to table these petitions in the 
legislature on their behalf so that they can voice their opposition to Bill 



 

 

61 to the government. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  As with previous members, I am asking them to 
present the petition without recurring reference to the prayer or the 
intent.  You, sir, know what I mean very well and I don't need to spell it 
out any further. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  If I have gone too far as 
far as the rules are concerned, I apologize to you, sir, but I thought I 
was within the rules, but I apologize if I'm not. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to continue with presenting petitions.  And the 
next petition that I will be laying before the Assembly is again from a 
number of areas in the province of Saskatchewan, not exclusively to 
Saskatoon and Regina.  But these people who have signed them . . . I notice 
there are some from Dundurn; there are certainly some from Saskatoon; and 
we also have an individual signing from Vanscoy.  Again, Mr. Speaker, these 
people have asked us to present their signatures to the legislature, which 
I am pleased to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have again another petition here from the south-east part of 
the province.  And again these people are mainly from the city of Estevan, 
the Premier's constituency.  They are also from the city of Weyburn, from 
the small town of Oxbow, and from the city of Regina.  These people again 
are, by signing this petition, Mr. Speaker, are voicing their opposition 
and are asking us to present their views to the legislature, which I am 
pleased to do at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petition that I have in my possession right now is again 
from a different area of the province. The people who have signed this are 
from the city of Moose Jaw; they are from Wynyard; yes, Saskatoon again, 
Mossbank, North Battleford, and from Regina.  So you can see, Mr. Speaker, 
these people are from all over the province, and they've asked us, the 
opposition, to present their views, which we are doing by tabling these 
petitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from various parts of Saskatchewan 
again.  These petitioners come from the city of Estevan again, from Fife 
Lake, from Battleford, Saskatchewan, from Regina, and, Mr. Speaker, I am 
very proud and privileged to be able to present the petition on behalf of 
these concerned citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petition that I have in my possession now have been signed 
by approximately 20 individuals who are residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and they have asked us to present their views on the 
particular item that is before us.  And by signing this petition, they are 
attempting to voice their opinions and have asked us to table these 
petitions.  These people are from areas like Bushell Park, Saskatchewan; 
they are from Rocanville, Saskatchewan, Moose Jaw, Tuxford, and Regina.  On 
behalf of the people who come from these various areas, Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to present these petitions and table them 
today in the legislature. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition that I have, that I am going to be presenting at 
this particular time, again comes from the city of Saskatoon, and I note 
almost exclusively from my constituency.  We have such areas as 2217 
Clarence Avenue South; we have 3115 Calder Place, which I am very familiar 
with, Mr. Speaker; 51 Deborah Crescent; 743 Delaronde Crescent -- which is 
not in my constituency; 18 Bell Crescent; 2125 Cairns Avenue; 34 Clare 
Crescent.  Oh there's also one here from Davidson, Saskatchewan, and R.R. 
no. 5, another one from 108 Brown Crescent.  We also have one from Pike 
Lake, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  These people . . . Here's another one 
from R.R. no. 6, Saskatoon.  These people, Mr. Speaker, want us to make 
sure that the government is aware of their opinions and have asked us to 
table this petition, and I am very pleased at this time to be able to do 
so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petition that I have now, again comes mainly from the city 
of Moose Jaw but not exclusively.  There are people who have signed it who 
are residents of Gravelbourg and also of the city of Swift Current.  On 
behalf of these people and particularly the residents of Moose Jaw, the 
majority of whom have signed this petition, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to be able to represent them in this particular case and present 
their views by tabling their petition.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me return again to the city of Saskatoon.  Here again most 
of the people who have signed this one are again from my constituency, the 
constituency of Saskatoon South.  I notice people from 22 Pinder Crescent, 
412 Ruth Street, Louise Avenue, Churchill Drive -- well that's not in mine.  
There are a number, Mr. Speaker, who . . . 2106 Clarence Avenue, 20 Leyden 
Crescent, and so on.  All of them are from the city of Saskatoon and again, 
Mr. Speaker, these people, by signing this petition, are voicing their 
opinion in a democratic society, and by asking us to table it they are 
making the government aware of their position.  And I'm pleased to table 
the petition now. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition that I wish to table comes entirely from the 
southern part of the province.  And I notice here there are people from 
Dinsmore, Saskatchewan, from Rosetown, Milden, Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, it, I think, clearly indicates that these people are from all over 
Saskatchewan who are voicing their opinion, and asked us to present their 
views to the government by tabling a petition which I am now doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition that I am wanting to table again comes 
mainly from the constituency of Rosetown-Elrose.  These people are from 
D'Arcy, Saskatchewan.  They are from Harris, Saskatchewan; Fiske; and also 
from Rosetown itself.  Again these people are voicing their opinions and 
have asked us, Mr. Speaker, on their behalf, to make sure that the 
government is aware of what they feel on this particular issue.  And by 
tabling this petition, Mr. Speaker, they are able to speak directly to the 
government on this issue, and I am pleased to table the petition this 
evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to return to the city of Saskatoon in the next 



 

 

petition, and these individuals, Mr. Speaker, are from different areas in 
the city of Saskatoon.  And as the petitioners have before, these people 
are voicing their opinions by signing this petition and, by us tabling it, 
have access to the government in letting the government know exactly what 
they feel about the issue under review.  And I am very pleased to be able 
to lay this petition before the legislature and make the government aware 
of their position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my next petition is again from the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency area.  They're mainly from the city of Rosetown, but . . . or 
the town of Rosetown I guess it is, not quite a city yet.  And they are 
also from D'Arcy, Saskatchewan, from Elrose, and from Harris.  Again these 
people, by signing this petition, have clearly indicated their stand on the 
issue that is before us, and by asking us to table these petitions, Mr. 
Speaker, are using their democratic right to get their views across to the 
government. And I am very pleased once again to be able to table this 
petition in order that the government may well be aware of what these 
people feel about the issue that is before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to now turn to . . . well it's still the same area of 
the province, the Rosetown-Elrose constituency again.  And these people 
come from Rosetown; they do come from Elrose, Macrorie, Kyle, Saskatchewan, 
and Lucky Lake.  Again, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this 
petition are expressing their views in a democratic process to make the 
government aware of their opinions of the issue that is before us, and 
through the opposition tabling these petitions, they give the people the 
opportunity to express their views through the democratic process, and I am 
very pleased and proud to be able to table these petitions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition I have comes again from the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency but this time it includes a number of other areas.  It does 
include Rosetown but it includes also Elrose, and Sovereign, and it comes 
again . . . people from Fiske and Coleville, Macklin, and so on.  There are 
again a number of people who are concerned and are expressing their opinion 
and wish to make the government aware of their opinion on this particular 
issue, and have clearly demonstrated their democratic right to do so by 
asking us to table these petitions on their behalf, and making the 
government aware of exactly where they stand on this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to the south-eastern area of the province.  
The next petition that I have, it's a little bit different in that it is 
exclusively from those people who are concerned about the tax on books and 
newspapers, and therefore it's somewhat different than the others.  But 
these people come from areas like Sintaluta, Odessa, Indian Head, Regina, 
and Balgonie. 
 
These people again are using their democratic right that they have in a 
democracy to make the government aware of their opinions on a particular 
issue.  And by using the opposition, they are expressing their opinions and 
hopefully make the government aware of what the people are thinking.  And I 
am once again pleased to present this petition to the legislature and be a 
vehicle that the people can use to make the government aware of their 
opinions. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have one last petition that I want to present.  This is my 
last petition that I want to present, and this is the petition from the 
people of the city of Yorkton and area.  These people, Mr. Speaker, are 
using their democratic right to express their views on this particular 
issue.  And they have asked us, once more, to represent them in making 
their views known to the government on this issue. 
 
These people, as I said, are mainly from Yorkton, but there are people from 
Bredenbury and Saltcoats and Jedburgh, Canora, Churchbridge.  We also have 
somebody from Regina on this particular petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these people, I am very pleased to present this 
petition and lay it before the legislature.  And hopefully the government 
will become very much aware of the opinions of a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan on the issue that is before us, the E&H (education and health) 
expansion.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have here a number of petitions 
to present this evening on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who are very 
irate about the proposed provincial GST (goods and services tax).  The 
petitions read as follows: 
 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the Province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
(those words are underlined, Mr. Speaker, to urge the provincial 
government to stop the provincial GST) until the people of the province 
have an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial election. 

 (And it concludes with the words)  And as in duty bound your petitioners 
will ever pray. 

 
And then follow the names of the petitioners.  And these petitioners are 
really saying that the government doesn't have a mandate to implement the 
provincial GST in the dying days of its government. 
 
And these petitioners come, on this particular petition, entirely from the 
city of Saskatoon.  And it's not indicated on the petition any particular 
street but they . . . no I'm wrong here, there's one individual from Clavet 
and all the rest are from Saskatoon.  And I would certainly like to table 
this petition on behalf of individuals from my home city of Saskatoon.  I 
don't know whether any of them are constituents of Saskatoon Sutherland.  I 
don't recognize any names on this one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, it really is amazing; although I didn't 
recognize any names on the last petition, I have here another petition 
pertaining to the same subject, and I do recognize the name of one 
signatory who even happens to work in this building.  I won't release any 
names.  But it's very interesting that it's not one of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly but someone who works in the building . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No I don't believe that . . . I don't know who would . 
. . people expressing concern. 
 
And they all appear to be from Regina on this petition.  Some are from 
Irvin Street and Engel and McCarthy and Selby, all here in Regina.  And I'm 
very pleased to present these petitions also from people in one of the two 
largest cities here in Saskatoon.  Thank you. 
 
Now here's another petition, Mr. Speaker, pertaining to the same topic -- 
people who want to let the government know their concerns.  And these 
individuals come from Saskatoon -- from Waterbury Road, from 5th Street 
East, from Wollaston Crescent.  And it also includes a signature of one 
individual, one woman from Clavet.  And it also includes the signature of 
another woman from Marchwell.  So it's very interesting that it's not just 
people from Saskatoon who have signed this petition, but a couple of 
individuals from other places in the province.  And I think that'll be true 
in some of these others that I have to table as well. 
 
Now this next petition appears to have been out in the sunlight -- maybe on 
a counter of a business -- probably here in Regina since most of the 
signatures are from Regina.  I believe all of them are from . . . no, one 
is from Lumsden.  One is from Lumsden.  But the paper is rather brittle and 
yellowed so it's probably been circulated in a business. 
 
And the individuals come from Cohen Bay here in Regina, Riddell Crescent, 
Devonshire, Dunsmore also, and R.R. 2 here in Regina.  I'm not quite sure 
where that is, but it certainly is my pleasure to present these petitions . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm told that R.R. 2 is in the north end 
of Regina.  It's certainly a pleasure to present these petitions on behalf 
of these individuals.  This whole sheet is filled up with names from Regina 
-- not a blank space on the petition.  And I will just add parenthetically 
that none of the petitions I've signed so far have a blank space on it and 
I don't believe any of these . . . oh I saw just one blank space on one of 
these here.  We'll just check that as we go along. 
 
Here we have another petition, people exercising their historic right, 
their democratic right here in Saskatchewan to petition the provincial 
government on a subject that they vehemently disagree with.  And these 
people are from Saskatoon.  They want to give voice to their concerns.  And 
there's one individual here from Watrous, another from Allan, and all the 
rest are from Saskatoon on this particular petition.  And I'm very honoured 
to be able to stand here on behalf of the people of Saskatoon, the 
community that I represent, and to present petitions on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very interesting petition, 
because I just happened to drive through one of the communities indicated 
on the petition on my way to Regina here today -- the community of 
Kindersley . . . not Kindersley, Kenaston.  And there's another very 
beautiful community that I'm acquainted with just outside of Saskatoon on 
this . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order, order.  I ask the hon. 
member to restrict his remarks to the petition itself.  Saskatchewan has 
many interesting and beautiful communities.  However, you would have a 
better forum than presenting petitions to inform us of that.  The long and 
short of it, sir, is that you're not presenting petitions in the proper 
parliamentary manner.  I think you'll agree. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you for that advice, Mr. Speaker.  I'll certainly 
take it to heart.  The people, apart from the two communities I've just 
mentioned, the rest of the individuals signing this particular petition all 
come from the city of Saskatoon.  And once again the entire sheet is filled 
with signatures. 
 
Well this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, has people from Saskatoon 
primarily.  It has one individual from the community of Regina who signed.  
And actually one individual from my own constituency of Saskatoon 
Sutherland, and two individuals whose community isn't indicated but all the 
spaces, all 20 spaces on this petition, have been signed.  I'm certainly 
pleased to be able to present this petition on behalf of the individuals 
who took the time to sign it.  Thank you very much. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I take it that this petition is essentially from the 
community of Regina.  There are people from Ritchie Crescent, Ritchie . . . 
I guess it's just plain Ritchie here, from McCarthy, and from More, 
Courtney, 8th Street, Hanbidge, Mapleton, 6th Avenue, Stewart Avenue . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and there's even someone that signed here from Pilot 
Butte, who no doubt came into the city to sign this petition to indicate to 
the provincial government their feelings on the subject of great import and 
consequence to the province.  And accordingly, it's my honour and privilege 
to present this petition in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on 
their behalf.  Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals from this petition are also almost entirely 
from Regina.  There is only one street address here, so I take it that 
they're all from Regina, with the exception of one individual from North 
Battleford, who must have been visiting.  And I believe there's the 
signature -- since there's no street address -- the signature of a former 
member of the legislature, on this particular petition.  And it's certainly 
my privilege and honour then to be able to deliver this petition on behalf 
of a former member of the legislature -- the name is Bill Allen -- from 
here in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And here, Mr. Speaker, it's quite interesting.  This very 
next petition there's a name of a candidate running for election in the 
next provincial . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Now I'm going to ask the hon. member 
to refrain from comments which may be construed as provoking debate.  I 
think clearly the  
 Dcomment you were presently making certainly would be one of those and I 
ask you to refrain from those types of comments. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly won't make those kind 
of comments.  The individuals here are entirely from Regina, from Angus, 
from Coldwell, Williston, Houston, McNaughton, Pasqua, Grace, and many 
other streets here in Regina.  And once again the entire petition is 
signed, and it's my honour to present it on behalf of the individuals who 
signed it. 
 
Again from the community of Regina, another petition that is chock-full of 
names.  One individual from Arcola -- one individual from Arcola -- and all 
the rest are from Regina; lots of concern here in Regina.  Actually it's my 
pleasure to present this petition on their behalf, and thank you very much. 
 
This petition comes from Regina as well, one signature from the Regent Park 
area and all the rest from a wide assortment of different streets across 
the city of Regina on this particular petition.  And it certainly is my 
pleasure to present this petition on behalf of the individuals who have 
taken the time to sign it, indicating to the government that the prayer 
that was made in the petition be listened to and acted on, on their behalf.  
Thank you. 
 
And here again is yet another petition from the community of Regina and it 
has signatures also, variant signatures also from White City and Punnichy, 
and there's one from Hague, Saskatchewan on this particular petition.  And 
they too are indicating their concern to the provincial government in the 
ancient and historic democratic right . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order, order.  I'm going to ask the hon. 
member once more to not make comments extraneous to the petition, not 
provoke debate, not make references to the prayer.  And I'm not sure what 
else I can say at this time.  But basically simply present your petition, 
and I suppose the rule to follow, in as simple a manner as possible.  
That's the simplest . . . Now I'm going to have to ask you to do that, and 
I've asked you three times, I believe, and if I need to continue to ask you 
to do that, sir, I'll have to move to the next member. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This particular petition comes 
from the community of . . . I believe it's the community of Regina, from 
Sherwood Drive and from 6th Avenue, Jackson Bay . . . yes, these are names 
of streets in Regina.  And it's certainly my honour to present this 
petition on behalf of the individuals who have presented it.  This is all 
from Regina.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here we have a petition also from Regina, the names of individuals who 



 

 

are all from Regina, from Lindsay Street, from Sangster, from Hendry Place, 
Halifax, Pine Place, Straub, and many other places here in Regina.  And I'm 
certainly very privileged to be able to table this petition on their 
behalf.  Thank you. 
 
And here we have, Mr. Speaker, a petition from . . . well from all over the 
province, from Hague, from Saskatoon, from Watson, from Moose Jaw, and 
Lanigan -- individuals who are wanting to bring their concern to the 
government in this form of a petition.  And I certainly am pleased to be 
able to table this on their behalf as well. 
 
And here is a petition from east of Saskatoon, from the community of Bruno, 
and also one signature from Biggar.  The other signatories are from the 
city of Saskatoon itself, including individuals from my own constituency of 
Saskatoon Sutherland.  And it's an honour to be able to represent them in 
this fashion, presenting petition very directly on their behalf. 
 
And here's a petition from the communities of Saskatoon and Humboldt and 
Aylsham and Hodgeville -- full petition of signatures, individuals who want 
to bring their concern and lay it before the government in this form.  And 
I certainly am honoured to be able to present this on their behalf. 
 
And yet another petition, Mr. Speaker, this time from individuals 
essentially from the city of Saskatoon, with one exception, an individual 
from the community of Warman which is just outside Saskatoon.  Thank you. 
 
And another petition, Mr. Speaker, also from Saskatoon, a mixture of 
signatures from Saskatoon and Regina, including one signature from La Ronge 
and one from Dundurn, and again another signature from Saskatoon from my 
constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland.  And it's certainly an honour to give 
voice to a constituent's concern in the form of petition here in the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 
 
And another petition from the city of Saskatoon, bearing one signature from 
the community of Quill Lake, and all the rest of the signatures are from 
Saskatoon.  The entire form is basically from Saskatoon except for the one 
signature.  Thank you very much. 
 
Here is another petition from the community of Saskatoon; also just outside 
Saskatoon, the community of Aberdeen; and one signature from Nipawin.  And 
I have again the opportunity to give voice to a couple of constituents from 
my own constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland who have taken the time to sign 
this petition indicating their concern to the provincial government.  Thank 
you very much. 
 
This petition takes us back to Regina, it looks like -- indeed Barr Street 
in Regina, Sherwood Drive, Black Drive, Athol Street, Eastview Avenue here 
in Regina.  And all of the signatories indicate that they come from the 
community of Regina on this particular petition, Mr. Speaker.  And it's a 
privilege to be able to represent people here in the legislature even when 
they live here in Regina. 
 
And yet another petition, Mr. Speaker, this time from the communities of 



 

 

Regina, with one signatory coming from the community of Langbank.  And all 
the rest come from the city of Regina, a full petition sheet indicating 
their concern to the provincial government in the form of a democratic 
petition.  Thank you very much. 
 
Now here is a community . . . entirely from the community of Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker, and it's all from one address, 1325 Wolfe Avenue in Moose Jaw.  
And they are indicating their concern to the provincial government by way 
of petitioning.  It looks like it must be a seniors' residence or such, by 
virtue of the signatures on it, from the community of Moose Jaw.  I'm told 
many are retired teachers.  Thank you. 
 
Here is a petition from the communities of Regina and Punnichy.  And I 
think that's it, basically Regina and Punnichy, petitioners coming from 
those two communities, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 
 
(1945) 
 
This particular petition does not indicate where the petitioners come from 
-- which city -- and I'm not familiar with the names of the streets -- 
Century, Kowalchuk, Fairview, Princess, Avonhurst, Hanley, and Horace 
Streets and Grey.  And these are all people none the less -- even though 
I'm not sure where they come from -- who are very concerned and who want to 
petition the provincial government with their ancient and historic right. 
 
Here is a petition bearing signatures entirely from Saskatoon.  And it 
appears to be entirely from the east side of Saskatoon, from such addresses 
as Preston, Queen, East Place, Webb, Eastview, McKercher, Willoughby and 
Isabella -- east-side Saskatoon individuals who are indicating their 
concern to the provincial government by way of petition.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
And another petition here from Saskatoon, including signatures from my 
particular constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland.  These are again all 
individuals from the east side of Saskatoon representing people from 
McKercher, Carleton and Luther Place, Chaben Place in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Sutherland.  And it's very much an honour to give voice to their 
concerns by tabling their signatures here in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And here we have a petition with signatures principally from Saskatoon, but 
also bearing signatories from Dundurn and from Allan, Saskatchewan, these 
two communities outside of Saskatoon.  Actually I recognize some of the 
names on it.  Thank you. 
 
This petition must have been out in the weather; it's a little bit wrinkled 
and weather-worn.  It's from the community of Regina it appears, entirely 
from Regina, and it's a pleasure to be able to table this on behalf of the 
individuals who took the time to sign it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: -- Order.  What is the hon. member's point of order? 



 

 

 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to point out 
Beauchesne's, 6th Edition.  We don't have to go very far into the book on 
page 3 where it reads, "Principles of Parliamentary Law." 
 

 1.  The principles of Canadian parliamentary law are: 
 To protect a minority and restrain the improvidence or tyranny of a 

majority; to secure the transaction of public business in an orderly 
manner; to enable every Member to express opinions within limits necessary 
to preserve decorum and prevent an unnecessary waste of time; to give 
abundant opportunity for the consideration of every measure, and to 
prevent any legislative action being taken upon sudden impulse.  (That was 
on by) Sir John Bourinot, Parliamentary Procedure and Practice in the 
Dominion of Canada (4th ed., 1916) 

 
Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this point, I would like to bring to your 
attention, as being home on the weekend, there was many of the constituents 
that I've been talking to were asking whether our rights are being violated 
or not.  They feel, Mr. Speaker, without having to sign a petition, that 
those rights and their ability to have a voice in this legislature has 
really become a point of where that is no longer the point; they are not 
being heard in this Assembly.  And it is, Mr. Speaker, where the first 
paragraph of the parliamentary procedure says that that is their right and 
there should be not . . . and it states right there in that first paragraph 
that there should not be an unnecessary waste of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's not only an unnecessary waste of time but it's also a 
waste of taxpayers' dollars of what is happening in this legislature.  And 
I'm going to ask you if you would please rule on behalf of my constituents 
so that they'll have their voice once again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, it is not easy to 
glean specific rules of conduct from the opening paragraph of this book, 
which is really an introduction. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Page 3. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Page 3, I see that.  I thank the member for his 
assistance.   Page 3 does not provide a rule of conduct but simply a 
general statement as to what the rules of parliament are there for.  
However, it's worth reading, I think, rereading what the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloyd read.  He said: 
 

 The principles of . . . parliamentary law are: 
 To protect a minority and restrain the improvidence or tyranny of a 

majority . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, last Friday I read a column . . . a short book on 
obstructionism.  The Star-Phoenix said somewhat the same thing.  They said: 
 

 Whenever the Opposition in any of our parliamentary institutions resorts 



 

 

to stalling tactics, it seldom gets a high approval rating.  Its actions 
are seen by most of us as low grade partisan politicking. 

 
Then it goes on, I think, profoundly: 
 

 There is more to it than that. 
 
 When an Opposition puts up every roadblock the rules allow, it is not. . . 

merely obstructing for the sake of obstruction. It is -- or should be -- 
acting in what it sees as the best interest of the people (of all 
Saskatchewan). 

 
The editors of the Star-Phoenix are saying the same thing as the . . . I 
think that opening paragraph. And that is, as Eugene Forsey said in his 
article, and that is that the rules of parliament are here to protect the 
minority; they're not here to protect the majority.  The majority need no 
protection in any parliament.  Their majority will give them that 
protection.  The rules are here to protect the minority. 
 
On occasion obstructionism has a role to play.  It only occurs on rare 
occasions.  We think that time has now come when we have the right to delay 
the business of the House and ask the government to reconsider what it's 
doing.  Significantly, Mr. Speaker, so do the editors of the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix. 
 
I therefore say to the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd, but really more 
correctly to you, Mr. Speaker, what we're doing is within the rules.  What 
we are also doing is within the finest traditions of British parliamentary 
practice.  There's an easy way for the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd to get 
on to all the other subjects he's dying to talk about: that is to persuade 
the Government House Leader to pull the closure motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Is there anybody else who first wishes to speak to the 
point of order?  I'll give you one more opportunity. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, on this Assembly now for some almost 10 days 
of stalling techniques from the NDP (New Democratic Party), that they have 
been able to table in this Legislative Assembly some roughly 10,000 names, 
possibly maybe off their membership list, the NDP membership list.  I'm 
saying that if that's all they have, Mr. Speaker, right across this 
province, that they have something to be very concerned about.  I'd like to 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is another 990,000 people in this 
province, where this Assembly has come to literally a standstill, and those 
990,000 people that have not signed that petition have rights as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent some of those 10,000 names, and I represent some 
of those 990,000 people that haven't been put on petitions, and I believe 
that all people have those rights.  And I believe, sir, that it's time we 
get on with the workings of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I have listened to the arguments on both sides of 



 

 

the House.  The issue of presenting petitions is a point of order, one of 
several which is under consideration.  And the House is in a situation 
where they are trying to resolve the impasse, and I am reserving judgement 
and my ruling on these points of order as this process takes place, until 
I'm ready to bring in my ruling. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The petitioners on this particular 
petition are indicating the same concern that was dealt with earlier, and 
they come from the communities of . . . entirely from the community of 
Saskatoon, except for one signatory from the community of Langham and one 
signatory from the community of Kindersley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This particular petition, Mr. Speaker, bears the signatures of individuals 
entirely from my home community of Saskatoon, and the entire petition is 
filled, every space, with signatures from the community of Saskatoon, 
although no addresses are given, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one final petition, Mr. Speaker, for today. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- One final petition, Mr. Speaker, and all of the signatories 
come from the community of Saskatoon, including constituents and 
individuals that I happen to know, who have signed this particular 
petition.  And it's a pleasure, as their representative from the community 
of Saskatoon Sutherland, to table this petition, exercising their 
democratic right here in the legislature to communicate to the provincial 
government their concerns.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I'd like to present the 
following petition.  It states: 
 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan . . . 
 The petition of the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly sheweth: 
 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 

Saskatchewan to impose a major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from Saskatoon and also 
from Humboldt.  And the same . . . another sheet in the petition here, Mr. 
Speaker, also comes from Saskatoon and this is in around the Nutana, what 



 

 

they call the five corners in around Saskatoon, from Main Street and 
Dufferin Avenue.  So I present that as well. 
 
We also have another one here from Saskatoon, in around 13th Street area in 
the city.  Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from again Saskatoon, and it 
comes from the 6th Street East area in the city, as well as 7th Street and 
Davidson Crescent.  We have quite a number here from Saskatoon.  This is 
from 11th Street area in Saskatoon as well as 12th and 10th, and as well as 
the Assiniboine Drive. 
 
This one comes from Wadena and also from Saskatoon . . . quite a few places 
here in Saskatoon from Temperance, and Main, and 8th Street area, as well 
as Calder Avenue. 
 
This is also from the city of Saskatoon.  This one is from the Luther Tower 
area, again from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
The petition, again from Saskatoon, comes from Victoria Avenue, and then 
another from McKercher.  And this is . . . The member from Saskatoon says 
that Victoria Avenue is in around Nutana, and we also have Main Street 
which is also in Nutana.  And same with Lorne, I think, is also in Nutana.  
And Dieppe Street, that'll be in Riversdale, and Ball Crescent . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Bell Crescent, as well as 4th Street East.  
And there is McMillan Avenue, and then there is East Drive. I think that, 
of course, is on the south-east end of the city.  And again the petitioners 
from this area wish to exercise their right to be heard in the legislature, 
and I present that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- And again from the city of Saskatoon . . . And there's names 
in here from the 5th Street East area of Saskatoon, as well as Calder, as 
well as Adelaide Street.  And along with Saskatoon, here is Central Butte, 
Saskatchewan -- must have been a visitor in Saskatoon during that day -- as 
well as Albert Avenue, Trident Crescent, Frobisher Crescent, Wedge Road, 
McPherson, Braemar, also again Broadway Avenue and again on Main and 
Clarence and University Drive.  And these are again people from Saskatoon 
who wish to exercise their democratic right to be heard. 
 
And this petition again, it's from Saskatoon, and it's again from Main 
Street, Hilliard Street; we've got Central Place as well as Salisbury 
Drive.  And again these citizens from Saskatoon wish to exercise their 
democratic right. 
 
Now in this petition, Mr. Speaker, again from the city of Saskatoon, it 
comes from all parts of the city of Saskatoon.  We have people from 10th 
Street, Main Street, Broadway Avenue, 9th Street, and also in Glenside, 
Saskatchewan, as well, along with these other city streets in Saskatoon -- 
in Lansdowne Avenue, Primrose Drive, 14th, 5th, and Needham Crescent.  So I 
present these as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This petition comes from all parts of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker.  We have towns, I think, north of Saskatoon -- I guess down in the 



 

 

south area, Ceylon, Radville, and Weyburn.  So here we have people from the 
southern area presenting their petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here we're back into Saskatoon.  And again people from all over the 
city signed this petition, Mr. Speaker.  We have people from Wilson Street, 
from 11th Street; there's also from McPherson Avenue, as well as Taylor and 
Lansdowne.  And there's also people from 4th Avenue North, the more north 
side of the city of Saskatoon; Avenue G North as well as 5th Avenue North 
and then back to the Nutana area on Broadway, and then back in the northern 
area of Saskatoon, Walmer drive as well as Temperance, 10th Street, and 4th 
Street East as well as Park Avenue.  So the petitioners again would like to 
voice their concern in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have these from . . . I have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 . . . I've 
got about 18 people that have signed a petition in this particular sheet 
from Radville, Saskatchewan.  So I present that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we have quite a few people on this sheet from 
Radville, Saskatchewan, but along with Radville we have a person -- I guess 
must have been a visitor -- from Regina that was there.  There's a couple 
of names, you know, from Regina in this list, along with the Radville 
residents, and a few more also from Lake Alma.  And these petitioners again 
would like their democratic voice to be heard in this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in this petition, Mr. Speaker, we have a total of about 20 names, again 
from . . . well actually I have some more on the other side -- I would say 
approximately 25 names from Radville who have exercised their right to 
petition in this legislature. 
 
From another part of the province, on the more south side, we have 
Milestone as well as . . . I would imagine there must have been a few 
visitors from Regina.  There was four on this list from Regina, as well as 
. . . Well the majority comes from Milestone.  Some come from Avonlea as 
well.  So the petitioners again would like to present and have their voice 
heard in this legislature. 
 
Now there is quite a few, Mr. Speaker, on the next petition, from Yellow 
Grass.  But again it shows the extent that people visit.  We have a person 
here from Regina, as well as from Moose Jaw, as well as from Weyburn, and 
Estevan.  We have quite a number of people from all over the province in 
this one petition -- all the way from Weyburn.  I would like to read into 
the prayer, Mr. Speaker.  It's written a little bit differently on the next 
group, and I'd like to read that.  It says that "We the undersigned support 
the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax On Reading . . ." 
 
This is basically one related to the tax on reading, and it's concentrated 
on that.  And this particular petition, while it opposes in general tax, it 
was basically the opposition to the tax on reading.  And I therefore can 
read the prayer then, Mr. Speaker.  It says that: 
 

 That we, the undersigned, support the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax On 
Reading . . . 



 

 

 
 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Honourable Assembly may 

be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to reverse its decision to 
impose this unfair tax. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, this particular petition comes from the city of 
Estevan.  And from Estevan here we have, I would imagine . . . it comes 
from very different parts of the city.  Here it says, there is a petitioner 
here from Grundeen Crescent, from Nicholson, from Isabelle Street, from 
Albert, as well as from 5th Street.  There is also  
 Done from Garner Place, from George Street, as well as King Street, 3rd 
Street, and Perkins, and I noticed in here there was also one petitioner 
here from Torquay, Saskatchewan. 
 
This petition is also from Estevan, and I would like again to outline the 
petitioners who present from the different parts of the city of Estevan.  
There was one who was presented from 4th Street, another one from 3rd 
Street, another one from Maple Bay, another one from Isabelle, another one 
from Albert, and so on.  And the rest -- there's about 10 of them here that 
did not have a specific address, and it's just written down as Estevan.  
And again these petitioners present their own signature here, you know, as 
a voice to be heard again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Now on this petition -- again it's from Estevan and also 
from North Portal.  Again about . . . oh, I would say about 15 of the 
petitioners have Estevan in general, but we also have again Isabelle 
Street, and Irvine Crescent, as well as Nicholson Road in Estevan.  And 
again these petitioners present and want their voice to be heard again in 
this legislature. 
 
The next petition . . . the next area is from Regina.  I think it's 
important, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, it's important to read the city 
and it's important to read the areas in the city and it's important to read 
the areas of the city.  People are proud of their areas; people are 
extremely proud of where they come from and the streets that they live on, 
so I'm reading part of that as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So over here in Regina in 18th Avenue and 14th, as well as Elphinstone and 
as well as Centennial and Lorne and Victoria -- and there's also people 
from Gardiner Park as well as Scarth, and Munroe Place.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
again I present this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Now I've read these from quite a few provinces.  These are 
from different aspects again.  In addition to the people from Saskatoon, we 
have quite a few in here from Montmartre.  About half in this petition are 



 

 

from Montmartre and the other half are from Kendal, you know, along with a 
couple I have in here from Saskatoon.  And again these people present their 
petitions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again these people would like to exercise their democratic right to be 
heard in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and the petitioners from this 
particular one are from Kendal, Montmartre, and Odessa.  And again I 
present the petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we have quite a few petitioners from the 
Saskatchewan-Alberta border area, from a community called Carnduff, and the 
majority of them are from Carnduff. There's also one in here from 
Gainsborough, Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I again present this 
petition on behalf of these citizens from Carnduff and Gainsborough. 
 
This one, Mr. Speaker, there is about 10 people from the community of 
Cadillac who would like to present their petitions, and want their idea to 
be known here in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a list of very important citizens who also would like 
to exercise their democratic right to be heard in this legislature from the 
city of Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan. 
 
Now in this particular petition, Mr. Speaker, most of the petitioners for 
this one . . . on the 20 that I see in here, 19 are from the community of 
Frontier, Saskatchewan, and there's also one from Climax who must have been 
a visitor there during the day, Mr. Speaker.  So I present this petition on 
behalf of these people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Again we are looking at some very important communities here 
again who have presented their petitions.  And again, from the last 
petition, the people from Frontier, Saskatchewan, and again, along with a 
couple from Climax there's also a couple here from Claydon, Saskatchewan.  
And again, these people would like to voice their petition here in the 
legislature, and would like to be heard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Again, we have these communities from Saskatchewan, from 
basically Climax, Claydon and again Frontier.  And Frontier people, as well 
as Climax, and Claydon, wish to present their petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- With that, Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The division bells rang from 8:22 p.m. until 9:59 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 10 o'clock, the House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 2 p.m. 



 

 

 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


