





























































Hansard: April 16, 1991


 

 

April 16/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the petitions presented 
yesterday by various hon. members.  All such petitions were found to be 
irregular in form, pursuant to rule 11(6) and (7), and therefore they are 
not permitted to be read and received. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Van Mulligen, as chairman of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts presents the fifth report of the committee which is hereby 
filed as sessional paper 147. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, moved by myself, seconded by Mr. Lyons: 
 

 That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be 
taken into consideration before orders of the day. 

 
And I would ask leave for that. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall on 
Thursday next move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 
showing: 
 

 For the period June 19, 1990, to the date this return was ordered: (1) the 
total number of out-of-province trips made by each minister of the 
government; (2) in each case the destination and purpose of the trip; (3) 
in each case the names and positions of those who accompanied the minister 
at government expense; (4) in each case the amount charged on behalf of 
each person travelling at government expense; and (5) in each case the 
total cost of the trip separated according to cost incurred for: (a) air 
fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) entertainment. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on Thursday 
I will move an order of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

 For the period June 19, 1990 to the date this return was ordered, the full 
amounts paid by the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation in rental 



 

 

and any other associated fees for all of the province's trade office 
properties in Hong Kong, London, New York, Ottawa, Geneva, and 
Minneapolis. 

 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on Thursday 
next I shall move an order of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

 The provincial government's expenditure for the 1990-91 annual operational 
budget for all of the province's trade offices in Hong Kong, London, New 
York, Ottawa, Geneva, and Minneapolis. 

 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on Thursday 
next move that an order of the Assembly do issue a return showing: 
 

 With respect to Strategic Direct Marketing, the total amount paid to them 
from May 2, 1990 to the date this return was ordered, by all departments, 
Crown corporations, and agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on Thursday I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue a return showing: 
 

 For the period June 19, 1990 to the date that this return was ordered, a 
detailed list of the aircrafts chartered by each department, agency, or 
Crown corporation of the Government of Saskatchewan, including in each 
instance: (1) the purpose of the charter and and the minister who 
authorized it; (2) the name of the individual or company who provided the 
charter service; (3) the total cost of the charter and the name of the 
department, agency, or Crown corporation to which it was charged; (4) the 
date of the flight; (5) all destinations of the flight; (6) the names of 
each MLA or government employee on the flight; and (7) the number of 
family members of MLAs on each flight. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great pleasure today to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Assembly, 23 grade 12 students 
from the high school of Eastend, Saskatchewan.  Accompanying them today is 
Brad Hauber, one of the teachers, and Shelley Morvik, along with the bus 
driver Randy Morris. 
 
I hope they enjoyed their trip up here, and I hope they enjoy their visit 
in the Assembly and see the productive way and efficient way we run this 
Assembly.  And after this is over with, question period, I'll be meeting 
them for drinks and pictures and to talk about some of the things they want 
to know about the Assembly. 
 
Thank you very much.  Please welcome these . . . 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I too want to welcome the students from 



 

 

Eastend, Saskatchewan.  But it is my singular pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, 
to welcome 22 students from Wilfred Hunt School in Regina, grade 5 
students.  They are accompanied by one teacher, Mr. Speaker, and two 
chaperons.  JoAnn Friesen is the teacher, and Nancy Kramer and Joan Kramer 
are the chaperons.  Mr. Speaker, they are in your gallery.  I'll have an 
opportunity to speak with them and share a drink of some kind with them in 
a little while, and I'll also have my picture taken with them.  I hope you 
students pay attention to what happens here in the next little while until 
we have a chance to talk about it, and we'll talk about what happens a 
little bit later on.  Enjoy yourselves. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you I'd like to 
introduce to members of the Assembly two guests in your gallery, sir.  They 
are Ken and Carol Kluz of Wishart, Saskatchewan.  Ken and Carol operate a 
family farm in that district of the province.  I would also point out that 
Ken, notwithstanding his young age, was the reeve for a number of years of 
his rural municipality.  He has served his community well.  We hope that he 
will continue to serve not only his community but Saskatchewan well as the 
next New Democratic Party member of the legislature for Kelvington-Wadena, 
and I would ask you to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure 
for me to introduce to you and to the members of the legislature a mayor 
from a community in my constituency.  It's the very energetic community of 
Sturgis.  And it is a real pleasure to introduce the mayor, His Worship Bud 
Morken.  Bud not only is the mayor of the town of Sturgis, but he's also 
the chairman of the Preeceville hospital board and as well a former 
vice-president of the United Grain Growers. 
 
Mr. Morken is in the city on business and it's a real pleasure to have him 
here as my guest.  Mr. Morken. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have the honour to have been 
born and raised in the community of Sturgis, and nobody mentions it more 
often in this House than I do.  And I have known Bud Morken all my life, so 
I'd like to join the member from Canora in welcoming Bud here, and I hope 
he enjoys his day. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of SaskEnergy 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 



 

 

questions today pertain to the Provincial Auditor's report which is a 
searing indictment of this government's spending practices. 
 
At page 121 of the report, a copy of which I have in front of me, the 
auditor concludes that the establishment of SaskEnergy and its acquisition 
of the natural gas business from SaskPower was unlawful.  As I remind you, 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side warned that it would be at the time unlawful 
because it was done behind closed doors by cabinet order. 
 
Mr. Premier, in view of the Provincial Auditor's position -- and this is my 
question to the Premier: in view of this auditor's report and this position 
taken by the Provincial Auditor, how can you justify keeping these major 
transactions involving SaskEnergy and SaskPower in the back rooms, hidden 
from the public, and under a cloud of illegality? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as has been explained to the Provincial 
Auditor by SaskPower in discussions between the Provincial Auditor and 
legal counsel to the Provincial Auditor with legal counsel to SaskPower, 
SaskPower has two separate legal opinions, had them at the time of the 
transaction and they continue to be the legal opinions that have been 
offered to SaskPower, that the transaction was according to the statutes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, subsequent to that, the Provincial Auditor received and I 
might add, subsequent to a case regarding an SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) case about a year later, the Bury judgement, the Provincial 
Auditor received a legal opinion which led him to make the statement that 
he makes in the Provincial Auditor's report. 
 
SaskPower has said to the . . . and the government, basically the 
government in general here has said to the Provincial Auditor that if this 
is not resolved between the two divergent legal opinions, the government 
will undertake to present legislation to the House to rectify the 
circumstance.  We have said that.  We undertake that; we have undertaken 
that in a public way before.  We'll undertake it here in the House today. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, one final point.  The issue of SaskEnergy and 
SaskPower, two competing forms of energy being separate from one another is 
not the issue here.  The issue has been widely accepted by the public that 
the two competing forms of energy can be separated, and they are and so . . 
. But I once again reiterate, Mr. Speaker, it would be our intention to 
bring legislation forward to rectify the circumstance that the auditor 
outlines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier.  And may 
I say parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, that I do hope that before this session 
adjourns or prorogues or something happens that the Premier will at least 
have the courage to answer one of the questions that we ask. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- None the less, Mr. Speaker, my question, new question is to 
the Deputy Premier because obviously he's going to be answering this. 
 
The issue, there are many issues in this, but the issue that I'm addressing 
right now is the issue about the political . . . the decision by the 
Provincial Auditor that says that this process of yours is unlawful.  
That's the issue I'm addressing now. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I note the minister's attempt to explain this on the 
basis of somehow lawyers have differences of opinions.  And I don't know 
whether the Deputy Premier is basing that on the lawyers who advised him 
that he had a strong case on electoral boundaries but lost, or whether he's 
basing it on the legal opinion which said that he had a strong case for 
privatizing SGI and lost.  If they are I'll tell you they're in a lot of 
trouble and so are we. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier is this: if this really is 
a dispute amongst lawyers as you purport to say that it is, then I ask you 
to table your government's legal opinion now, showing us the legal basis 
for the position that you take that you can do it legally.  Will you table 
that legal opinion today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, the Leader of the 
Opposition, who is a lawyer, rises in this House and says, that what the 
Provincial Auditor has said is that it was unlawful -- that's what he said.  
That's not what the Provincial Auditor said.  The Provincial Auditor did 
not say that.  Now that hon. member is a lawyer.  I have never pretended to 
be a lawyer.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, I have been thankful many times that 
I'm not a lawyer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, on page 121, that page to which the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition referred, under .04 the Provincial Auditor says, 
and I quote:  "We questioned SaskPower's authority to sell its natural gas 
business."  He said, "we questioned." 
 
And then at .05: 
 

 In the opinion of our lawyer . . . (says the Provincial Auditor, speaking 
about the legal opinion that he as Provincial Auditor had received) 

 
 In the opinion of our lawyer, the scheme and object of The Power 

Corporation Act is to establish a corporation with the exclusive mandate . 
. . (and etc., etc.). 

 
He did not say at any time that it was unlawful.  What I have said in 
explanation is that two legal opinions from prestigious law firms were 
advanced to SaskPower that we were well within our rights to do what we 
did.  The Provincial Auditor, far subsequent to that, a long time after 



 

 

that, based on a case concerning SGI almost a year later, received a legal 
opinion based on that subsequent case which said that he would question it 
again and which said that he thought we should have acted otherwise.  That 
was far subsequent to the actual case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue here is the explanation has been given . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order! 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Before we move to the next question, I would just like to 
bring to the attention of the hon. members that question period is not a 
forum for a debate, and please try to conduct yourselves accordingly. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Deputy Premier.  
And I think you will agree with me, Mr. Speaker, that the questions are as 
succinct as they can be, given the complex nature of the issue. 
 
The question I asked was whether the government would table its legal 
opinion, to which there was not a word said by the Deputy Premier.  And I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, very bluntly, that on page 122 of the Provincial 
Auditor's report, the Provincial Auditor says: 
 

 . . . we are unable to conclude that SaskPower had adequate legislative 
authority respecting the sale of its natural gas business to SaskEnergy. 

 
And on .10 says, we therefore say that there should be legislative 
authority, allowing me to conclude that he concludes that it's unlawful. 
 
Now my question to the Deputy Premier is very simple.  That's what the 
auditor's report says.  And you have a choice, Mr. Deputy Premier, you have 
a choice either to live up to your government's commitments, in fact the 
Premier's commitment that the Provincial Auditor would be backed, or you 
don't live up to that commitment.  Now which is it?  Are you backing the 
auditor or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, absolutely we're backing the auditor, 
absolutely.  The auditor has the right to raise his concerns and he has 
raised them.  In the context of those concerns . . . and let me just quote, 
Mr. Speaker, from the auditor's report, subsection .08, .09, and .10 on 
page 122. 
 

 .08  SaskPower has opinions from two lawyers regarding its authority to 
sell the natural gas business. 

 
That's what I said to the hon. member a few moments ago. The Provincial 
Auditor reiterates that here. 
 

 .09  This is a complex legal issue.  However, by reason of the legal 
opinion provided to us by our lawyer, we are unable to conclude . . . 



 

 

 
And so on, says the Provincial Auditor.  A complex legal issue, I have said 
that it is.  The hon. member, I think, will agree that it is a complex 
legal issue.  The Provincial Auditor has said so. Therefore, under the last 
clause here: 
 

 .10  Therefore, if SaskEnergy is going to operate the natural gas business 
we recommend the Act be changed or legislation passed to clarify 
SaskPower's authority to sell the business. 

 
The Provincial Auditor says that's what he recommends.  I have said in an 
earlier answer here in the House -- I have said in public -- that it would 
be our intention, if this is not clarified through the legal channels, it 
would be our intention to introduce legislation to do just as the 
Provincial Auditor has asked.  What more does the hon. member in his 
muck-raking want to raise?  What we have said here is that we would clarify 
it.  Mr. Speaker, we will clarify it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Deputy Premier.  
Why is the Provincial Auditor recommending that there be legislation 
introduced except that what the government has done up to now is unlawful, 
and that's why the legislation's got to be renewed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And moreover, Mr. Speaker, who in the world is going to 
resolve this dispute amongst lawyers?  That's a prescription for no 
decision. 
 
Now I ask the Deputy Premier very bluntly: why doesn't your government 
screw up its courage and admit that your actions were unlawful?  Either 
shelve your plans to privatize SaskEnergy or in the alternative, place all 
of your privatization plans, the secret ones and the ones which are not so 
secret, place all of your privatization plans squarely, fairly, and openly 
before the electorate for the people to decide.  Or are you afraid of what 
the people's answer will be on your privatization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, nowhere does the Provincial Auditor say 
that the actions taken by SaskPower were unlawful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor does not say . . . the Provincial 
Auditor points out, as is his responsibility to do, a question that he has.  
He points out concerns that he has.  Based on, and I have said before in my 
other answer, in terms of . . . SaskPower acted according to the legal 
opinions that we had received from two law firms -- two law firms.  We 
acted according to those.  The Provincial Auditor reiterates that and says 
that SaskPower has those opinions from two firms.  He's seen those legal 
opinions. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said we have not acted unlawfully.  If this is not 
solved between . . . the divergent opinions of the two law firms are not 
solved, we will act as the Provincial Auditor has recommended and bring 
legislation forward in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question and I have a final 
question on this topic, Mr. Speaker.  Again, I indicate that the 
journalist, "SaskPower sale illegal, auditor says"  Globe and Mail story 
"Needed more than order-in-council authority," on and on it goes. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have a question to you.  I have a question.  And before 
I make the question, Mr. Speaker, it's clear, given the sensitivity of the 
Minister of Justice, given his extreme sensitivity and given also the 
minister's inability to answer this question, it's clear to me that this 
discredited government opposite is still pushing privatization of 
SaskPower, but it's pushing it through the back door -- privatization in 
private. 
 
Now I have here in front of me a memorandum by the chief executive officer 
and the president of SaskEnergy, Mr. Baker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Order!  Order!  Allow the 
Leader of the Opposition to put his question.  Order, order.  Order! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for bringing that rowdy 
bunch to order.  I have a question . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I was saying before I was interrupted by them, 
what they're doing is privatizing in private.  I have here a memorandum 
dated April 12, 1991 from Bill Baker, the president of SaskEnergy, April 
12, 1991, where Mr. Baker says in part, and I quote:  "Just for the record, 
I'm still strongly in favour of proceeding with a share offering." 
 
This question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, isn't it true that you've 
told Mr. Baker to go full steam ahead, to proceed full steam ahead with the 
privatization of SaskEnergy, contrary to your earlier public statements 
that you would not proceed with it until the public supports it?  I accuse 
you, sir, of breaking your word and secretly working to privatize 
SaskEnergy before the next election.  Isn't that why you're ignoring the 
Provincial Auditor's report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the issue in the lead-up to this series of 
questions today, the issue was the Provincial Auditor's report as it 
relates to the separation of SaskEnergy from SaskPower.  In other words, 
two competing forms of energy -- electricity and natural gas. 
 
Now we have said that we would hear what the Provincial Auditor has said, 



 

 

and had our discussion with the Provincial Auditor and have given the 
assurance that we would clarify by legislation if necessary, and I've 
answered that prior to this in the House. 
 
The hon. member raises the questions of what Mr. Baker, the president of 
SaskEnergy, has said.  He says he's done it in some secret way.  What could 
be less secret than an opinion of the president of SaskEnergy on the third 
page of one of the newspapers?  He said Baker, the president of SaskEnergy, 
and the government in some secret circumstances . . . There's nothing 
secret about what Mr. Baker is expressing as his view -- his view, being 
the president of SaskEnergy.  And that's what his view is.  That's what he 
said. 
 
Obviously the hon. member knows there would need to be legislation if this 
separation was to turn into a privatization.  What we are discussing here 
is a separation of two competing forms of energy.  No one in the province 
is arguing with the reasonableness of that separation.  That separation is 
well regarded, the deregulation of natural gas industry. 
 
All of that, Mr. Speaker, which fits into a plan for this province, 
something that that member doesn't know the meaning of -- a plan.  There's 
actually a plan for the gas industry, a plan for rural Saskatchewan, a plan 
for all of that.  There's a member who stands, the opposition leader, who 
stands in the House and questions one thing after the other as it relates 
to questions being raised by the Provincial Auditor, but at no time does he 
lay out his plan for anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Deputy Premier.  
Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me here an article in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix dated December 21, 1990.  The headline says, "SaskEnergy head 
wants pipeline privatized."  The quotation says -- this is speaking to Mr. 
Bill Baker: 
 

 "I want an answer.  I want a yes or no as soon as possible," he said in an 
interview Thursday. 

 
This is December 21, 1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy Premier is: what have you told Mr. 
Baker?  What have you told him?  Give us the answer.  Isn't it true that 
you told him you're going to privatize it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  The Deputy 
Premier has been asked to -- has risen anyway to respond -- not the 
Minister of Justice.  I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, what I know about Mr. Baker's mandate is, 
as the president of SaskEnergy -- that separate company which operates in 
that competing form of energy with electricity, natural gas -- is to do 



 

 

this: to fit the plan.  And the plan is to continue with the tremendous 
increase in the natural gas industry in this province, to continue with 
SaskEnergy's mandate of moving that natural gas to markets both domestic 
and international, to move that natural gas . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And we're doing it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- And we're doing that.  Tremendous reserves of natural 
gas all across the western side of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the president of SaskEnergy has a very strong view that there 
is a need -- and more than just a view, a knowledge -- as of most people in 
the business community and in the oil and gas patch that there is a 
definite need for $200 million to increase the pipeline capacity to move 
that very natural gas that has been explored for in this province in recent 
years because of our policies.  That member will not agree with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Now before the next series of questions, I'm going to just 
have to bring to the attention of hon. members that, you know, we get into 
this area of debate and I'm just going to have to intervene and shorten 
things up on both sides of the House . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, not every time. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, and it's to the Premier for a reason because we 
appear to have contradictory statements between two of his ministers, 
because one day prior to Mr. Baker's announcement on December 20, the 
Minister of Justice is quoted in the same Star-Phoenix as saying this: 
 

 We are very much looking at equity positions in the gas pipeline division 
. . . (of SaskEnergy) 

 
 "We are analysing whether we would need legislation for an equity issue," 

said Lane, adding a decision on it is expected by the end of January. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this:  is it your intention to 
go ahead with the privatization plans of Trans Gas?  We say that that's 
what you're going to do.  Why don't you stand up and defend your 
government's record?  Tell us yes or no.  Admit it to the people of 
Saskatchewan, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, it's very easy for me and any minister in 
this government to defend the record on natural gas.  When I think that 
there were seven wells drilled in 1982 and 700 last year, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it indicates the record is very, very clear that the New Democratic 
Party was opposed to natural gas development, opposed to natural gas 
exploration, and wanted to buy the natural gas in Alberta. That's not a 
course of action that we chose. 
 



 

 

We also indicated quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, that the Trans Gas, because 
of the great expansion of the natural gas industry in Saskatchewan, that 
Trans Gas is going to have to expand and expand dramatically its pipeline 
capacity. 
 
I indicated that the best way to do that would be equity.  We did indicate, 
Mr. Speaker, that for this year the immediate expansion's being done by 
further government borrowings. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They interrupted 
me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another question to the Premier -- to the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker.  We have seen a series of ministers get up and try to 
give answers, answers which did not answer the questions which are posed.  
And that question very simply is this, Mr. Speaker:  Mr.  
 DPremier, are you planning to go ahead with the privatization of Trans Gas 
and SaskEnergy? 
 
That is an important question because the answer to it has certain 
implications to the people of this province.  For example, Mr. Premier, if 
the separation of SaskEnergy from SaskPower is illegal, then it quite well 
be that the collection of bills by SaskEnergy is also illegal.  So why 
don't you come clean with the people of this province and give us an answer 
on what you intend to do with SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and Trans Gas, Mr. 
Premier?  You stand up and give us your answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the difficulties of debating the gas 
industry in Saskatchewan is that, Mr. Speaker, when they were government, 
gas was a health problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see the development of natural gas as an industry, Mr. 
Speaker, that's created hundreds of jobs in the province, brought, for 
example, to most farms, Mr. Speaker, rural natural gas, reduced input costs 
to farmers, Mr. Speaker.  We have now created significant new industries as 
a result of the development of gas, natural gas.  We have a fertilizer 
facility being built, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We indicated earlier that to comply with the Provincial Auditor we're going 
to bring in legislation to separate the utilities at the appropriate time.  
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member who answered the question before 
indicated that any dealing of privatization with SaskEnergy would be done 
in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've listened very carefully, Mr. 
Speaker, to the answers from the Minister of Justice, and I want the people 
of Saskatchewan to realize that it was totally non-committal and it was 
qualified with if, if, if.  We're not here to deal with if's, Mr. Premier; 
we're here to deal with the facts that belong to the people.  What . . . 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's very, very simply this, Mr. 
Premier, very simply this: we don't want to hear if; we want to know what.  
What do you as Premier of this province intend to do with SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, and Trans Gas?  We say you're going to privatize it.  You stand 
up in your seat and you tell us yes or no.  Do you have the courage to do 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I do find it somewhat humorous that the hon. 
member is concerned about what if's, when they have now had nearly five 
years to come up with a plan to deal with the natural gas industry.  And on 
the one hand the member from Regina North West says that the industry is 
all right; the member from Saskatoon says we're going to tax the oil and 
gas industry -- we're going to drive it back.  The Leader of the Opposition 
is on either side of the derrick, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have now said three times this afternoon the 
position of the government.  I find it disappointing that the hon. member 
chooses not to listen to it. 
 
We did indicate, Mr. Speaker, that there would be legislation to effect the 
separation and that's been discussed.  And secondly, Mr. Speaker, anything 
to do with privatization of SaskEnergy would be done in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- I guess, Mr. Speaker, I will try one more time to the 
Premier.  I wonder if the Premier would answer this question.  Mr. Premier, 
we've heard your Minister of Justice and we've heard your minister in 
charge of SaskPower say that should it be effected and if we need to do 
this, then it will be done. 
 
The question the people of Saskatchewan want to know, and they want to know 
it before an election, Mr. Premier, is this: do you intend to go ahead with 
the privatization of SaskPower, of SaskEnergy, of Trans Gas prior to a 
provincial election?  And if you do, I want to say this to you, sir, that 
the people of Saskatchewan will rebuke that course.  And I challenge you to 
put it to the people of Saskatchewan in a general election, if that's your 
intention.  Why don't you tell us what you really intend to do instead of 
playing back-door politics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again this debate, Mr. Speaker, is one that I'm sure even 
the press gallery . . . has picked up the terrible inconsistencies of the 
New Democratic position.  I've now indicated three different times what the 
government's position is.  The hon. member makes a threat if the government 
does x, y or z, what he's going to do about it. 
 



 

 

But isn't it very interesting that at the same time the party opposite has 
had five years to tell the public what its policies on agriculture, on gas 
development, on industrial development, on economic diversification . . . I 
could go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker.  The New Democratic Party, the NDP 
stands for no darn policy, Mr. Speaker.  That's what the public sees out 
there; they want answers from you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  I once more ask the 
hon. members to come order.  The member from Moose Jaw North, member from 
Moose Jaw North and all other members, I'd ask you to come to order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 69 -- An Act respecting Referendums and Plebiscites 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
Referendums and Plebiscites. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 2:41 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took 
her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the following Bill: 
 

Bill No. 52     -- An Act to provide for the Division of Saskatchewan 
into Constituencies for the Election of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly 

 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:43 p.m. 
 

RESOLUTIONS WITHDRAWN 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I thank my members for cheering me for making this very, 
very significant announcement, Mr. Speaker, that before orders of the day, 
I rise to drop item no. 11, resolution 18, now standing in my name on the 
order paper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Dropped. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before orders of the day, I rise 
to drop item no. 5, resolution no. 12, presently standing in my name. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Dropped. 
 
(1445) 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's moved by myself and 
seconded by the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster: 
 

 That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be now 
concurred in. 

 
What I meant to say, Mr. Speaker, that at the conclusion of my remarks I 
will be moving a motion to this effect.  If I might, Mr. Speaker, by way of 
preamble to the report, state that in our system of parliament it's an 
accepted principle that any expenditures by government must be controlled 
by the legislative arm, in this case by the Legislative Assembly.  It's 
accepted that the government cannot spend money in the future without the 
prior approval of the Legislative Assembly.  That is why budgets are 
approved by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Equally, it's accepted that any spending which has been done by the 
government must also be reported back to the Legislative Assembly.  That is 
why the Legislative Assembly appoints a Provincial Auditor to make sure 
that money has been duly accounted for, that money has been spent in 
accordance with the manner specified by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
That is why the government prepares a Public Accounts to show the 
Legislative Assembly and the public the details of all of its expenditures 
for previous fiscal years.  Both the auditor's report and the Public 
Accounts are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for 
review, and my remarks pertain to a report of the Public Accounts Committee 
to the Legislative Assembly regarding a Report of the Provincial Auditor 
for the fiscal year 1988-89 and the Public Accounts for that same fiscal 
year. 
 
At the outset, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge and thank the role of the 
committee Clerk, Mr. Bob Vaive, in the proceedings of the committee.  I 
also want to recognize and thank the staff from the Clerk's office, 
Hansard, and generally the Legislative Assembly for their assistance in 
helping the committee to do its work. 
 
I also want to thank the Provincial Auditor -- first, the acting Provincial 
Auditor at the time, Mr. Fred Wendel, then the new auditor, Mr. Wayne 
Strelioff, and their staff for their attendance at the committee meetings 
and for their assistance to the committee.  Also the Provincial 
Comptroller, Mr. Gerry Kraus, for his attendance at the committee meetings 
and for his advice to the committee. 
 
I also want to thank the many deputy ministers and agency heads, with one 



 

 

exception which I'll note later, for their attendance before the committee 
and for their co-operation at the committee meetings. 
 
Finally, I want to thank all the members of the committee for their hard 
work and their contribution to the work of the committee and to preparing 
this report that is before members of the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Now in saying that, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss, I would be remiss if I 
did not say a word about what appeared to be a new spirit of co-operation 
on the part of government members of that committee.  This new spirit of 
co-operation was particularly evident during last November's sitting of the 
committee, even if it was somewhat less apparent last spring during our 
sittings. 
 
Now perhaps this was related to the Premier's announcement just prior to 
our November sitting, an announcement entitled, new realities and the 
public process.  This was a series of initiatives designed apparently to 
promote accountability.  Now I'm not sure what these new realities were 
that led the Premier and the members of his caucus to embrace 
accountability, but it reminds me of the quote by Samuel Johnson, sir, who 
said, and I quote: 
 

 Depend upon it, sir, when a man knows he is to be hanged in a fortnight, 
it concentrates his mind wonderfully. 

 
And so on the eve of an election, at the 11th hour, at the last minute, we 
have a Premier, his caucus, and members of the committee concentrating 
their minds wonderfully on public accountability. 
 
My own assessment of this is, better late than never.  I would never look a 
gift horse in the mouth, and neither would, I think, would the people of 
Saskatchewan.  We all appreciate this new spirit of co-operation.  After 
some eight years, nine years, of what would appear to be new lows in 
accountability and reporting to the public, we now appreciate this new 
spirit of co-operation.  The recommendations in the report, sir, reflect I 
think, good co-operation on the part of the members.  And again, I'm 
thankful for the help of all of the members of the committee in making the 
report possible. 
 
Having noted, sir, the significant agreement that existed in framing the 
recommendations before you, I would also be remiss if I did not note some 
significant differences of opinion that existed during the course of the 
committee meetings. 
 
First to the issue of corporation accountability -- the public of 
Saskatchewan, and you, sir, may be interested to know that some $7.5 
billion of public money is administered through various corporate entities 
of the provincial government.  Now some of these corporate entities report 
to the Legislative Assembly and to the public through the Crown 
Corporations Committee of the Assembly, and/or through the Public Accounts 
Committee -- corporate entities such as Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications, and the like. 
 



 

 

Other corporate entities do not in fact report to the Legislative Assembly 
in that fashion.  These are corporations in which the public ownership is 
somewhat less than the 100 per cent, which is the case with SaskPower, at 
least it is today. 
 
Members of the committee were frustrated that they were not able to bring 
to account various corporate entities in which the public has a significant 
stake.  In particular, we debated at some length a corporation known as the 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation.  You will know, the public will know that 
in the year under review, WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation was created as a 
result of significant financial input, significant shareholdings by the 
people of Saskatchewan through some corporate entities owned in total by 
the people of Saskatchewan, i.e. SaskTel and the Saskatchewan computer 
corporation. 
 
We felt that it would be in the best interests of the public to ask some 
questions about the privatization that occurred, and whether or not the 
people of Saskatchewan's interests were served by the financial 
transactions that took place on their behalf.  We were denied the 
opportunity to ask those questions.  The people of Saskatchewan were denied 
the answers to questions that they had about how some of their taxpayers' 
dollars were spent. 
 
We suggested at that time, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps the answer is for the 
Legislative Assembly through the Provincial Auditor to ask for a special 
audit of all privatizations that had occurred.  This was not accepted by 
the committee. We suggested in many ways that the doors should be open, 
that the books should be open for these corporations, but we were denied 
that opportunity.  And again I wanted to point that out to you because that 
is not clear in the report that is before the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I also want to point out a reservation of opinion by the auditor.  For some 
years the auditor has been saying that loans to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation cannot be recorded as assets, but should be written 
off as expenditures by the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  
This would result in an accumulated deficit being somewhat higher than it 
is now.  Reportedly, the accumulated deficit of the province of 
Saskatchewan is approximately $4.5 billion.  If the auditor's suggestions 
were to be followed, the accumulated deficit would increase by some $555 
million, or more than half a billion dollars. 
 
Now the auditor is saying something akin to that if you, Mr. Speaker, or 
any member here were to give a member of their family, were to give them a 
loan of $2,000 and then gave them the money to pay you back, you could not 
go to the bank . . . in disclosing your assets and liabilities, you would 
not count that $2,000 as an asset.  In fact, it's money that you've spent. 
 
Now the Provincial Auditor is saying that is money that has been spent and 
money that should be recorded as such.  The provincial government in its 
own peculiar and unique way is saying no, that's an asset.  Contrary to the 
Public Sector and Auditing Committee of the Canadian Institute of Chartered 
Accountants, the government clings to some unique and peculiar auditing 
principles, understood by no one, accepted by no one, least of all the 



 

 

auditor.  I would be remiss, sir, if this was not pointed out to you, and 
the people of Saskatchewan, that we have this very significant difference 
in accounting for money that has been spent and that in fact the deficit is 
some half a billion dollars higher than it should be or as reported by the 
provincial government. 
 
That is one of the reasons, sir, that members of this side of the House 
have been saying for months that it's time to open the books of the 
government. 
 
I also want to point out to you a difference of opinion with respect to 
something called supplementary information.  The Public Accounts are a 
book, a report which list the details of every expenditure by the 
government.  Where the expenditures are above $20,000 per employee for 
wages and salaries, above $10,000 for payments to suppliers, and above 
$2,000 per person for travel, these details of expenditures are listed by 
department.  This is done so that the taxpayers of the province of 
Saskatchewan will know in some detail how it is that their dollars have 
been spent. 
 
Until 1984 this detail of expenditure was also indicated where the 
aggregate of those sums was exceeded by people -- individuals or companies 
-- where they . . . throughout various government departments.  That is to 
say that if a person was paid $10,000 by one department and $11,000 by 
another department, the details of that would also be recorded. 
 
In 1984 the government stopped providing that level of detail in accounting 
to the people of Saskatchewan.  They have refused consistently to provide 
any clear explanation, any clear answer to repeated requests by the members 
of the opposition why this was stopped.  They have not been forthcoming in 
their answers.  We say that they are hiding information from the public.  
They are hiding information from the Legislative Assembly.  We say they 
deserve to be condemned for what they have done. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to report to you . . . and I'll say that 
earlier I mentioned that the committee had received good co-operation from 
deputy ministers and heads of agencies in their answers to the committee. 
 
I want to make note now of one notable exception, and this is the 
Saskatchewan Property Management committee.  During the course of our 
meetings, the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation was asked a 
certain question.  They said that they would undertake to provide the 
answer.  They do so knowing that privileges are extended to them in 
appearing before the Committee that they have a very clear obligation in 
terms of these privileges to provide the answers. 
 
(1500) 
 
After this report was prepared, we find out from the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation that they are in fact unable or unwilling to answer 
a question that they said that they would answer, the question that was put 
to them by the committee.  Whether or not the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation has breached, has breached the privileges of the 



 

 

House -- and these are privileges of the House that are extended to them 
when they appear as witnesses before the Committee -- is something that the 
Committee will have to discuss in due course and report back to you on if 
necessary in the near future. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I note again that certain troublesome lack 
of disclosures and certain troublesome ways of operating by the government 
seem to persist year in and year out, notwithstanding statements on their 
part and actions of late that they now embrace accountability.  The proof 
would seem to be in the pudding and it states that this government still 
has some way to go in terms of practising accountability to the public.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a privilege for 
me to congratulate you once again on your new elected position as Speaker 
of the Assembly.  I'd like to wish you all the best in the future. 
 
And at the outset in beginning my remarks, I'd just like to say that it's 
always a privilege to be able to second a motion in regarding the reporting 
of a committee's report here in the Legislative Assembly, and the types of 
meetings that go on, probably in some essence behind the scenes, where it 
takes many hours of debate and questioning of various different 
departments. 
 
I would like to say it's always that pleasure for me to, as vice-chairman 
of the committee of Public Accounts, to be able to second the motion and to 
say that a portion of that Provincial Auditor's report is now out of the 
way and the people have had the chance to duly exercise their rights in 
finding out and being able to question the Provincial Auditor on the report 
that he sets before the people, through the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I'd like to make some remarks where I agree and disagree with the member 
opposite as he was making some of his remarks in regards to the Provincial 
Auditor's report, and I guess, if you will, freedom of information to the 
public of Saskatchewan. 
 
I'd like to begin my remarks by saying where I disagree with the member 
opposite.  The member opposite, as chairman of the Public Accounts 
Committee, had indicated that under the previous . . . or the now 
administration, the Government of Saskatchewan, that it had been taken to 
the new lows of accountability as far as the public accountability . . . 
the government accountability is concerned, to the public of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I'd like to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that by all means, if the member 
of the opposition would like to reflect back into the days when the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) were the government in the province of Saskatchewan, 
that it was their administration that would not allow public hearings to 
take place in Public Accounts Committee or that of Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 



 

 

It was in 1982, where our government had said that public accountability 
will be just that -- public accountability -- in that the public would be 
more than welcome, the public would be more than welcome to come in and 
attend these meetings in Public Accounts and in Crown Corporations.  As 
well, we even expanded upon that, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, that we 
have also brought cameras onto the floor of the legislature here so when 
these particular topics are discussed, that the public have the right to 
view them and the freedom to view the procedures of this Assembly. 
 
I'd like to say that I disagree also with the member of the opposition that 
when he said it was . . . that this government had taken this accessibility 
to its lowest, is that he should not be allowed to make those particular 
types of statements without backing it up. 
 
As I have indicated earlier, we now, as any ordinary citizen out there, are 
welcome to sit in on these Public Accounts Committee meetings.  Or any 
ordinary citizen out in . . . across the province are allowed to come in 
and sit in the Crown Corporation meetings and they're allowed to join us in 
our galleries here in the Legislature. 
 
They are allowed to have any information through any one of their members, 
be it in opposition or be it in government, that sit on these committees.  
And that reflection should be just that -- a freedom of that information, a 
flow through those members that sit on those committees back to those 
individuals that are interested in the procedures and what goes on through 
the different types of the reportings of this particular accountability. 
 
I'd like to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that when we had headlines such as, 
millions of dollars improperly accounted for, says the new Saskatchewan 
auditor, I guess probably if we wanted to take a look at the auditing 
standards in the province of Saskatchewan, indeed right across this 
country, there are at times changes to those auditing practices.  And as we 
have, from time to time, have had to correct different government 
department offices with those particular standards and procedures, and I 
think over the years we have found that that has been exactly what has been 
taking place. 
 
I would think that, Mr. Speaker, when we said that millions of dollars have 
been improperly accounted for, it's not that the dollars have gone anywhere 
astray, they have been properly spent.  If you ask the Provincial Auditor 
whether each one of those dollars could be properly accounted for, the 
answer that the Provincial Auditor would give you, yes, he can account for 
where the dollars are, he can account to where the dollars are, but because 
of the particular categories of the accounting procedures, they might not 
have been in what he perceived to be the right column. 
 
So those are the indifferences that have to be discussed out and they will 
be discussed out through the Public Accounts Committee meetings.  And the 
public are welcome to that particular type of information. 
 
The open the books policy that the NDP portray, to say that they are going 
to open the books if they ever become government in the province of 
Saskatchewan, is about the most ridiculous statement I have ever heard in 



 

 

years coming from the Leader of the Opposition and all members of the 
opposition. 
 
I'd like to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that the books are open to the 
Provincial Auditor; the Provincial Auditor does have the right to report to 
the people of Saskatchewan through this Legislative Assembly, and he does 
that as an independent auditor.  He does not work for the Government of 
Saskatchewan, or he does not work for the opposition.  He works for the 
Legislative Assembly.  He is an officer of the Legislative Assembly, not of 
the Government of Saskatchewan or the NDP opposition. 
 
The NDP have been out there . . . as the Leader of the Opposition said to 
the people of Saskatchewan, well if we form government, I will have an 
independent audit of the books; we'll open the books and I will have an 
independent audit. 
 
Well that independent audit has been taking place from year to year to year 
to year through our Provincial Auditor.  How more independent can he get?  
I ask the Leader of the Opposition or any member of the opposition to 
indicate how more independent can they get.  What is meant by the NDP when 
they say they will have an independent audit?  Is that meaning they're 
going to have an independent audit even of the auditor's office?  Does that 
mean that there is going to be another arm of administration that is over 
already what we call an independent office?  No, I believe not. 
 
I believe it's misleading the public of the province of Saskatchewan by 
saying that the departments are not being properly audited right to this 
day.  We have in this province, we have an auditor's report here, Mr. 
Speaker, that is done up by the Provincial Auditor and private auditors.  
The Provincial Auditor does not, and I repeat, does not have to even accept 
the private auditor's report if he does not feel that it is properly 
audited.  And therefore they can either ask that private auditor to go back 
and get some more information for him before he accepts this report or the 
Provincial Auditor has the right to ask for any additional information that 
he deems is necessary. 
 
So for members of the opposition to believe that this administration in any 
way, shape, or form can stymie the operation of the Provincial Auditor or 
the private auditing in this province or indeed in any province or in this 
country, is misleading the public of Saskatchewan.  And it is not correct. 
 
I say that as a member of the Public Accounts Committee, and on the 
government side as a government member, I too want to make sure that I do 
not have to face any embarrassment in the public when it comes to public 
expenditure and through some department of government running amok with the 
taxpayers' dollars and I know nothing about it.  If I find out that is 
happening by some bureaucrat doing this particular thing, I want to correct 
that particular situation myself, Mr. Speaker, not to have the opposition 
out there ranting and raving and making a political issue out of it.  
Making a political issue is fine, but getting the particular situation 
corrected is another thing.  And that's what I, as a member of that Public 
Accounts Committee, would do, as I'm sure if the hon. members were serving 
that committee properly would do themselves. 



 

 

 
As far as I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, and I am not going to speak too much 
longer in regards to this, but it's to the point of allowing the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan here an opportunity to understand the 
Provincial Auditor's office and what he's doing.  We in the public are 
becoming more and more demanding of information and how the system runs and 
how it works and what's happening with some various statements that can 
show up in an auditor's report, you know, that have some bad reflection 
towards the administration and some various different departments.  Well, 
rightfully it should be.  But it's not to be taken out of context.  The 
opposition does that for political reasons.  The Provincial Auditor does it 
for proper accountability.  That's all he's interested in.  He's interested 
in accountability. 
 
And when the members opposite have indicated that they would like to see 
more and more departments brought under the guide-lines of the Provincial 
Auditor, maybe it's time.  Maybe it's time we really reflect and take a 
good look at everything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I've indicated on several occasions, it's maybe we ought to take a 
look at all public funding across this province, and maybe it's time that 
we take a look and see if we want to be auditing hospitals and education 
facilities and all these particular types of government-funded . . . well I 
guess probably government-funded organizations that are fairly well arm 
lengths away from the central administration here in Regina. 
 
So I would tend to think that, you know, like with the Provincial Auditor 
and the demand that's put upon him today for information, is that we've had 
a major and significant start from this administration, from this 
government, by allowing the public to attend these meetings, by allowing 
TV, radio, and news media to come into these meetings, and by allowing this 
type of information to flow through the media and ourselves and everyone 
else to those people that seem to be interested enough to ask the question. 
 
But I honestly believe too that maybe it's up to the Provincial Auditor and 
up to us as to allow him some funding to go out there and educate the 
public through himself, not through us, through politicians, but allow him 
to travel the province and explain in the high schools and explain in the 
public through the medium and through other means and ways of talking to 
the public, and explaining exactly what his office is all about and what 
his responsibilities are. 
 
(1515) 
 
People do not know what the Provincial Auditor is.  Some people honestly 
believe that the Provincial Auditor is the tax man. And I'll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, this is the most . . . I think what we have to do, we have to 
start right from the basics and allow the people an understanding of 
exactly what it's about. 
 
The Provincial Auditor . . . and I think it's time that members on both 
sides of the House start to really take a serious look at it.  I think we 
ought to look at easing up the Provincial Auditor's, I guess, mandate, and 



 

 

not maybe . . . maybe what we got to do is look at some resources, extra 
resources for him to be able to do just these kinds of things because of 
the increasing concerns about taxation and expenditures and servicing the 
debt and providing public services and all these kinds of things. 
 
I honestly believe, Mr. Speaker, that the public are demanding it.  The 
public are demanding more and more answers from government today.  And I 
think there's that kind of, I guess a reform that's taking off across this 
country, and our province.  And I believe that we have started, back in 
1982.  We're doing it again through amendments to the Provincial Auditor's 
report, through the freedom of information Bill, and the Provincial 
Auditor's report here in the Assembly during this session.  And it's going 
to be ongoing and ongoing and ongoing. 
 
And I think these are the things that we have to do to improve our system 
and accountability as private members of this Legislative Assembly.  And we 
ought not to try and take advantage of a non-partisan report and make some 
politics out of it, some political games out of it.  But I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think probably as long as I'm here and as long as members 
of the opposition are here that that will never come to be because people 
seem to like to take . . . some people, and usually members in the 
opposition, love to take the negatives out of here and make some political 
games out of it. 
 
But I believe those negatives are not negatives, and as I had indicated 
earlier, are not negatives, Mr. Speaker, to chastise a government or to 
chastise any administration, but to point out to the public of Saskatchewan 
what the Provincial Auditor suggests, where we could stiff up on our 
accounting procedures in each department and bring true, true 
accountability to the accounting system.  And that's what it is. 
 
And I ask the media and I ask members of the opposition, they both should 
go to the Provincial Auditor, they both should go to the Provincial Auditor 
and talk about those two things and ask about those two things, not mislead 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan and say that the funds are not 
there.  The funds are there.  The procedure, the accounting sheets, and the 
columns that . . . the accounting sheets that . . . and the procedure of 
the accounting procedure has maybe got to be spiffed up in these different 
departments and I know they're going to be. 
 
But I would like to also, before I do take my seat here in the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, would also like to, I guess maybe in a lot of way, thank the 
Provincial Auditor for putting up with a committee that has maybe become 
more or less than professional and has become more of a bear pit for 
politicians to take a slap at each other and not really do what is meant as 
a mandate of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
I honestly believe that instead of going into these Public Accounts 
Committee meetings and name calling and calling down bureaucrats as some 
members of the opposition have done . . . is to ask the proper questions 
and it's to ask proper questions of the bureaucrats as they come in.  Ask 
the Provincial Auditor at that meeting: is what we're hearing from the 
departments, is that true?  Is there still disagreement?  If there is still 



 

 

disagreement, how can we clear up these disagreements? 
 
And as a Public Accounts Committee, then write a report back to this 
Assembly suggesting how we can clear up some of these particular errors and 
clean up on the accountable side of the report. 
 
And really it would do me nothing better as a member of the Public Accounts 
Committee to see that each department could come in from one year to the 
next and all we would have to look at is a half a dozen pages or so as to 
saying -- from the Provincial Auditor saying that, my gosh it's a job, 
finally well done by all departments in their accountability. 
 
Now I would like to say that I think, I think that won't be either, because 
what it is, is from the changes of accounting practices from time to time 
and through the adding, through that particular type of ongoings, that 
we're going to always have some concerns somewhere, as we do in private 
business or as anyone has if they're having to deal with accountants or 
auditors. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to encourage all members of this Assembly to 
work together in regards to educating the public and bringing them . . . in 
allowing them more of an understanding of the procedures that take place 
through this legislature, through the floor of the legislature, in their 
committees. 
 
Allow the Provincial Auditor to go out there and educate the public about 
what his job is and what he feels maybe he should be doing more, and 
allowing the people then to have that understanding so that they can come 
back to us as elected members with suggestions as how they feel we should 
go and direct this Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Auditors, and 
what strengths we should put upon the Provincial Auditor, and allow that to 
happen without us holding the Provincial Auditor back, as members of this 
Assembly. 
 
There is also that one more thing that I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is members of the opposition have led the public to believe that 
there has been interference by government, by cabinet administration, and 
by the Premier of this province, that there has been some interference.  
And it's a belief out there, made by the NDP, that the public should not, 
should not put up with this government interfering with the Provincial 
Auditor's report or reporting. 
 
That is not the case, Mr. Speaker.  The Provincial Auditor will tell the 
public themselves that there is no way that a cabinet minister or a Premier 
or any member in this legislature can interfere with his reporting.  He is 
independent.  He cannot be muscled one way or another.  He is not an 
employee of government again.  And I would tell you and I will tell members 
of the opposition that if they are going out and telling the public of 
Saskatchewan that, that that is the most misleading words that can flow 
from any one of those committee member's mouths. 
 
And I challenge any member of . . . I challenge any member of the 
opposition and the media and any person out in the public to get hold of 



 

 

the Provincial Auditor and find out and ask him personally.  Don't take my 
word for it, but ask him personally about his accountability procedures, 
about the information flow, and about everything else surrounding his 
office. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you this.  It won't be near as 
damaging to a government as when you see that these kinds of headlines come 
out in the media.  And I would read this as a private citizen and I would 
maybe accept it as its context and I would say no, I would say, that's bad.  
But that's not the way it reads.  The interpretation is misleading.  And I 
will tell you, sir, that these are some of the reasons why it is necessary 
for the Provincial Auditor to have that freedom to go out and talk to the 
public and explain to them what he's all about and what the accounting 
procedures are about in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I'd like to thank you for taking the time to listen to the few words I had 
to say regarding this, and encourage all members that if they have anything 
to add, to stand in their place and speak.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, my understanding was that there was an 
agreement that only a few people were going to speak, but the member has 
invited all the members to speak to this.  I will only take a few minutes, 
and just a few minutes to say to the member opposite from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster that I want to read from a quote of the provincial 
auditor, the past provincial auditor, where he says the following -- he 
says the following: "I have been interfered with in the execution of my 
duties." 
 
That can only mean one thing -- that the Executive Council on the opposite 
side, Mr. Speaker, interfered with the execution of the duties of the 
provincial auditor.  That's what it means.  And when the member opposite 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster says that we the members opposite are the ones 
making the attack, this is a quote from the provincial auditor.  It's not 
our quote. 
 
And I remember well last year in this House when the former member from 
Kindersley, Bob Andrew who was the Justice minister at that time, made a 
personal attack on the provincial auditor.  He stood up in this House as 
the Justice minister and selectively quoted from a letter written by the 
provincial auditor and made absolutely certain, Mr. Speaker, that that 
interpretation of that letter was such that it did not portray the meaning 
of what the provincial auditor meant; and the provincial auditor, Mr. 
Speaker, had to write a letter in defence of that letter. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, last year and the year before, they blamed 
Willard Lutz that he was the one that was attacking and he wasn't 
objective.  This year, Mr. Speaker, we have a new Provincial Auditor, and 
the Provincial Auditor's report is even thicker -- thicker with accusations 
that tell us that this government is not responsible on public spending.  
It doesn't have authority on millions of dollars of expenditures that it 
should be taking before the Legislative Assembly. 



 

 

 
The Executive Council, Mr. Speaker, is subject to, not above, the 
Legislative Assembly.  The Executive Council, which is the executive, has 
no authority other than that which it receives from this Assembly. 
 
(1530) 
 
And time and time again, in the last number of years in the auditor's 
report we have the expenditures of funds which have no authorization in 
legislation.  That's what the previous provincial auditor has said, and 
that is what the present Provincial Auditor is saying again -- that the 
executive disregards the legislation that exists and creates a government 
unto itself.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is unacceptable, and that is not being 
responsible to the people of this province. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, until they come to recognize that the 
Legislative Assembly is the supreme Assembly, and not the Executive 
Council, this report of the Provincial Auditor is going to be getting 
thicker and thicker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- And there are going to be, Mr. Speaker, numerous examples of 
money that is unaccounted for, and that has no, that has no authority in 
legislation for that expenditure. 
 
Now my colleague said before that there are a number of things that this 
government has done which are simply unacceptable.  Let me, for example . . 
. the member opposite says that the public has access to information.  All 
you have to do is turn to this report and to last year's report, and I find 
in Appendix III, 18 agencies or departments that have not completed their 
statement for the end of 1990 -- 18. 
 
There are another 23, Mr. Speaker, 23 lists of financial statements and/or 
annual reports not tabled in the Legislative Assembly -- 23.  And the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster says that they are open to the people of 
Saskatchewan.  What utter nonsense.  What utter nonsense.  The Provincial 
Auditor, not just this one, the previous provincial auditor, says that he 
was unable to do his work because the private auditors that were hired in 
the Crown corporations did not supply him with sufficient information for 
him to do his work.  Time and time again the Crown corporations refused. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, in last year's report there was a memorandum 
issued by the Executive Council which said to the top administrators in the 
Crown corporations not to co-operate with the Provincial Auditor -- not, 
Mr. Speaker, not to co-operate with the Provincial Auditor.  And yet they 
were trying to tell us that they are open.  They are a democratic, 
responsible government.  What absolute nonsense.  What absolute nonsense. 
 
Now when they are on their deathbed, in the last few months of their 
government, they're trying to bring back . . . they're trying to bring in 
this House some legislative reform, some democratic reform.  They are 
saying, well, forgive us in the last nine years or eight and a half years, 



 

 

but we are now repenting.  Have faith.  Have trust.  Well I'll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province are not that nai päve, 
they know what the hidden agenda is.  And I'll tell you that the Provincial 
Auditor, this present Provincial Auditor, like the previous ones, have no 
choice. 
 
I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, the other day, when this report came 
out, to talk to a reporter who was here in the '70s when the Allan Blakeney 
administration was in effect.  And he said to me, you know isn't it 
surprising, the reports of the Provincial Auditor used to be about that 
thick, compared to this one, compared to this one.  And they're getting 
thicker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, and half the dimensions. 
 
And they were very, very thin because we had a government that was 
responsive to the people.  We had a government that was democratic and 
open. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And accountable. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Yes, and a government that was accountable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would have a lot more that I would like to say on this 
particular topic, but the agreement was that we would not go very long.  
But I couldn't refuse the invitation from the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster to say a few words on this topic.  And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I will take my chair. Thank you very kindly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, for all three items I wish to convert 
them to notices for motions for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: -- Converted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Commendation of Government of Saskatchewan 
 
Mrs. Duncan: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to take this 
opportunity to congratulate you on your unanimous election as Speaker, and 
I'm sure that you will continue to serve us well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Duncan: -- Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I'll be moving a 
motion seconded by my colleague, the member from Shaunavon, that states: 
 

 Resolved that this Assembly commend the Government of Saskatchewan for 



 

 

preparing and implementing a comprehensive plan to stabilize Saskatchewan 
communities, protect the provincial economy, diversify the province, and 
reform the institutions and practice of government in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in our talks with people across the province, my colleagues 
and I have heard time and time again how concerned people are about the 
stability of their communities.  And this, Mr. Speaker, is most evident in 
rural areas like the constituency of Maple Creek where many towns are 
heavily dependent on the agricultural economy. 
 
Saskatchewan's agriculture industry has been hit hard in recent years with 
drought, low grain prices, and of course the international subsidy wars.  
And these problems have threatened the very existence of many of our small 
towns and villages, and even to some extent the cities. 
 
The Saskatchewan way of life is in danger of becoming a way of the past, 
Mr. Speaker.  Our government, under our Premier, is committed to the people 
of Saskatchewan and we are committed to the entire province.  The people 
sitting around me on this side of the House are determined to stop the 
erosion of the Saskatchewan way of life. 
 
The crisis in agriculture has affected all of us and has made it very clear 
that this province cannot live by wheat alone.  The dramatic effect that 
downturn in the agriculture sector has had on the provincial economy has 
shown us all how very dangerous it is to leave all our eggs in one basket. 
 
Saskatchewan needs a plan, Mr. Speaker, a plan not unlike that of what the 
government has put in place today.  Our government does have a long-term 
plan for Saskatchewan, a plan for growth and development, a plan for 
diversification and stability.  I would put this question, Mr. Speaker, to 
the lawyer from Riversdale: where is your plan, Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition?  It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that he along with the folks 
across the floor do not have a plan, have never had a plan, and I believe 
members on this side have proof of that. 
 
This lack of policy becomes more and more obvious as they make their trips 
across the province.  When asked about his policy or his plans for the 
future of Saskatchewan, all the Leader of the Opposition can answer is, I 
won't give you my position.  I have quotes from the Leader-Post, Mr. 
Speaker, direct quotes from the member himself, where, on November 16, 1990 
he stated he won't divulge any of the NDP platform.  And on January 4, 1989 
he told the people of Saskatchewan that dictating his policy would be 
counter to the point of view that he has. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how long do the people of Saskatchewan have to wait?  
How long will he play with the lives of the people of this province before 
he outlines his plan?  The time has come, Mr. Speaker, for the Leader of 
the Opposition to come clean and admit in fact he has no plan; he has no 
ideas for the future of our province.  Mr. Speaker, he is absolutely and 
utterly stuck in the past.  He is stuck in the 1970s, and those policies of 
buy up everything, have government own everything, and those type of 
policies, Mr. Speaker, in today's world will not work. 
 



 

 

The people of Saskatchewan won't fall for his line, Mr. Speaker.  They 
won't fall for that wait and see attitude.  They won't play his game of 
hide-and-seek with something as important as their very way of life. 
 
In meeting with people across the province, in their homes, in coffee 
shops, in community centres they have told us their concerns and we have 
listened.  We have listened, Mr. Speaker, to the concerns of the people of 
Saskatchewan, both urban and rural, and we have acted upon their ideas and 
suggestions, and we have dealt with their needs.  When they ask for help to 
deal with the high interest rates, this government introduced the mortgage 
protection plan, and the mortgage interest reduction plan, which has saved 
more than a hundred thousand home owners in Saskatchewan $138.6 million in 
interest payments.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is money in the pockets of 
Saskatchewan home owners. 
 
We listened when they asked us to help them to build and diversify their 
communities, and we started the community bond program.  Community bonds 
provide Saskatchewan people with the tools to help themselves.  Personal 
savings can be accessed and used to attract businesses to many towns and 
villages across the province.  To date, 42 community bond corporations have 
been created, Mr. Speaker, and many more are in the works. 
 
The overwhelming response to this innovative program proves that 
Saskatchewan people want to be involved in their future.  They want to say: 
I've helped make a difference; I've invested in the future of my community 
for myself and my children.  And there are other very important initiatives 
of diversification. 
 
Our government's record on economic development and diversification, Mr. 
Speaker, is a record unsurpassed by any other government in the history of 
our province.  When we took power in 1982, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was 
the least diversified province of all the provinces in Canada.  From 1983 
to 1989, Mr. Speaker, there was a $600 million, or 600 per cent increase in 
investment in manufacturing and processing.  And when the members opposite 
were in government, Mr. Speaker, they refused to diversify, choosing 
instead to nationalize, to buy up everything in sight from potash mines and 
paper mills to agricultural land. 
 
Our government, on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, has invigorated 
Saskatchewan's economy with programs to help small business, trade and 
investment and energy and agriculture. 
 
I would like to talk for a few minutes about our programs we have brought 
in to open up the energy sector to our economy.  This particular policy, 
Mr. Speaker, has meant a great deal to my constituency, the constituency of 
Maple Creek. 
 
The policies of this government concerning Saskatchewan's oil industry has 
led to tremendous growth in this sector of our economy.  These policies are 
part of a long-term strategy designed to encourage development and maximize 
benefits. 
 
What we did, Mr. Speaker, was look at the strengths of each different area 



 

 

of the province and build on those strengths and those resources.  
Obviously northern Saskatchewan has resource development, uranium, gold, 
the forestry industry on the renewable side; strengthen that for the 
benefit of the people of northern Saskatchewan.  In my area we are blessed 
with unlimited amounts of gas and oil to some extent.  So along with the 
agriculture that goes on in my area, the growth in the gas industry has had 
a tremendous effect on our towns and villages.  And as I said, these 
policies are long-term policies and long-term strategies to stabilize the 
economy. 
 
And I should say, as a direct result of these initiatives, there have been 
in Saskatchewan since 1982, an additional 7,940 oil wells drilled.  And I 
should remind the people of Saskatchewan that had the policies of the 
previous government been kept in place, we would have fewer than 5,000 
producing oil wells in Saskatchewan instead of today's staggering total of 
more than 12,000 producing wells. 
 
In the oil industry alone, Mr. Speaker, more than $2 billion has been added 
to the total investment in the oil field.  We are now pumping out more than 
600 million barrels of oil, and that's an increase of more than 269 million 
barrels. 
 
An additional 48,000 person-years of employment have been created, bringing 
the total number to more than 91,000 person-years of employment.  And those 
are jobs for Saskatchewan people I might add.  On top of all these 
benefits, provincial revenues have increased by more than 967 million, 
bringing the total to more than $3 billion. 
 
(1545) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, people on this side of the House look at the oil industry 
as a vital, vital component of the provincial economy.  And by opening up 
the industry we have allowed increased exploration and development of one 
of the world's more needed resources.  The members opposite greatly opposed 
these changes to the royalty structure, changes which obviously has worked 
for the better. 
 
Now it seems, Mr. Speaker, that once again the members opposite do not have 
a plan for building and strengthening our resource sector.  And it is a 
classic case of the left hand not knowing what the other left hand is 
doing.  I don't think those people have a right hand. 
 
But I would like to comment, Mr. Speaker, on an article that appeared in 
the Leader-Post April 11, 1991 where three NDP members state categorically 
that they would increase taxes on the resource sector, that this industry 
would become, and I quote here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a "cash cow" under an 
NDP administration. 
 
And who were these members that look at the energy sector as being a cash 
cow to be milked at will?  The member from Saskatoon Nutana, the member 
from Regina North East, and the member from Regina Centre.  And yet in the 
same article, Mr. Speaker, the article of April 11, 1991, two other NDP 
members state than an NDP government would co-operate with resource-based 



 

 

companies.  Well I don't really think that they know what the word 
co-operation means. 
 
But who are the members that say they would co-operate with the resource 
sectors?  Well it's the Leader of the Opposition and the business whiz, the 
member from Regina North West.  So I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, which 
one of these five members are telling the truth.  Which one of the five 
members are actually stating the policy of the NDP with regard to the 
energy sector?  So again I would say, Mr. Speaker, where is the vision?  
Where are the ideas? 
 
Another area of resource development that was greatly expanded under this 
government is natural gas.  Before 1982 the NDP government did not 
encourage the exploration and development of natural gas in Saskatchewan.  
They entered into a long-term agreement with Alberta to buy natural gas 
from Alberta, leaving Alberta with all those jobs which we could have here. 
 
In 1987 our government deregulated the natural gas industry, creating a new 
market for natural gas in Saskatchewan.  Now Saskatchewan is one of only 
two provinces in the country that export natural gas.  Decreasing 
government involvement in natural gas markets and prices have resulted in 
record levels of activity in the production of this valuable resource, and 
substantial cost savings have been passed on to consumers. 
 
For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, consumers 
now have a choice as to where they buy their natural gas.  They don't have 
to buy it from SaskEnergy.  And I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that the 
number of wells drilled in Saskatchewan rose from 9 in 1982 to 960 in 1989.  
Government revenues on gas royalties have gone from less than 1 million in 
1982 to approximately 36.2 million in 1989.  Investment in Saskatchewan's 
natural gas industry rose from 2 million in 1982 to more than 165 million 
in 1989.  This tremendous growth in the natural gas industry means jobs and 
stability for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is just another example, Mr. Speaker, of what we have done for 
this province in the last nine years.  It's a scary, scary thought to many 
of my constituents, even the thought of an NDP government getting back. 
 
My people elected people, government, that they said they would help.  And 
they elected a government that stood behind its word.  We listened to the 
people when they needed help with 22 per cent interest rates.  We 
introduced the production loan program, Mr. Speaker, and last year with the 
spring seeding program we put money into the hands of farmers to put their 
crop in the ground.  And we will continue to stand behind our agricultural 
sector. 
 
But at the same time, as I said previously, we look at the strength of the 
different areas of the province, whether it's in energy, in forestry, in 
mining, in dry land farming, food processing, and that. 
 
So I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that this government stands up for the 
people.  We listen to the people and we have listened to the people.  And 
this government will be returned after the next election. 



 

 

 
We will continue, Mr. Speaker, to bring in innovative programs to continue 
to develop . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed.  Order, order.  The 
member's time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the member to rise and move the 
motion. 
 
Mrs. Duncan: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Shaunavon: 
 

 That this Assembly commend the government for preparing and implementing a 
comprehensive plan to stabilize Saskatchewan communities, protect the 
provincial economy, diversify the province, and reform the institutions 
and practice of government in Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of my remarks today, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be seconding the resolution brought before this House by my 
colleague,  
 Dthe member for Maple Creek.  I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for 
the opportunity to address the House, for me to address this House and 
speak to this very important resolution. 
 
It is important, Mr. Speaker, because it represents a plan.  And when I say 
a plan, Mr. Speaker, it's like my colleague said, the people across the way 
don't have a plan.  Any time you talk about a plan to stabilize 
Saskatchewan you talk about a plan that is long term, a plan that is 
workable, a plan that is economically feasible.  But most of all, Mr. 
Speaker, you talk about a plan that puts the ideas of the public to work. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we went to the people and asked them what they felt had 
to be done.  The answer they gave us, Mr. Speaker, was not surprising.  
They told us that we have to have some kind of safety net system so the 
farmers can be assured of, you might say, a decent living.  They told us we 
have to work towards diversifying our economic base to reduce our 
dependence on agriculture.  They told us that we have to devise some kind 
of system that would encourage local investment in our local communities.  
And, Mr. Speaker, they told us we have to reform the practices of this 
government to make them more open and accessible, and to follow greater 
input and decisions of great importance. 
 
To address all these concerns, Mr. Speaker, with one plan seemed almost too 
much to ask.  But, Mr. Speaker, we listened.  We have accomplished a great 
deal, Mr. Speaker.  The bad times that have fallen on the farming industry 
in this decade have had a devastating effect on the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
As my colleague had said, with the low grain prices, the drought, and the 
international grain wars, it's been tough, Mr. Speaker.  Yet somehow 



 

 

through these very difficult times, we have managed to increase 
manufacturing investment in this province by more than 700 per cent and to 
keep the population at higher levels than it has under any previous 
administration before.  We felt that we didn't have to play second fiddle 
to anyone, Mr. Speaker.  We set out to prove to the rest of the world that 
Saskatchewan, it is a very resourceful province. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What's your plan?  You've been fiddling while 
Saskatchewan burns. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- And I hear the members talk about a plan.  They should be 
ashamed of themselves because they haven't had a plan, Mr. Speaker.  They 
go around talking about they're going to revise it during election time.  
Why not come clean, bring up your plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Why else would Saskatchewan, the province with more farmers 
than anywhere else, import fertilizers from Alberta, Manitoba, when we 
could have manufactured our own right here with our own natural gas.  I 
know the people across the way are against it.  The one from Moose Jaw 
says, we're for it.  The one from Regina says, we're against it.  But it 
just depends on where they're at. 
 
Just imagine, Mr. Speaker, one of the largest livestock producing areas of 
the world not processing its own meat products.  Imagine, Mr. Speaker, a 
province that has wealth and a forest products not producing its own paper 
products.  Imagine a province that is blessed with heavy oil reserves, not 
upgrading it.  And imagine, Mr. Speaker, a province that depends on its 
supplies of water but doing nothing about it. 
 
Saskatchewan was missing out on all the things that could be done for 
itself, and it was falling behind the rest of the country and the world.  
And I just have to take one example, the province, my neighbouring 
province, the province of Alberta.  And when I said something about water, 
they did something about their water in the good times, Mr. Speaker, and 
it's showing up right now.  We didn't do anything in the good times about 
our water, Mr. Speaker.  We just let it flow.  That's all we did.  They 
knew they couldn't buy the water so they didn't buy it. 
 
So we set out to change that, Mr. Speaker.  We now have built a mill in 
Prince Albert producing its own paper, a fertilizer plant being built at 
Belle Plaine.  And we have, you might say, in North Battleford, a bacon 
plant processing pork.  Not only do we have Canada's first heavy oil 
upgrader in Regina, but another one being built in Lloydminster. 
 
And when I mentioned about water, about the Rafferty and Alameda dams which 
everybody across the way was against . . . You don't build it.  You can 
save the water, but you can't save it without building something first, Mr. 
Speaker.  And they know nothing about building. 
 
We have opened the doors to the new products development, like Impact 
Packaging in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, who produce environmentally 



 

 

friendly food packaging.  We have brought programs that have strengthened 
the competitiveness of the tourism industry, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm proud of 
this, Mr. Speaker.  In my constituency alone, over $585,000 have been 
allocated promoting tourism in the south-west, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The deregulation, as my colleague had said about the gas industry, is very 
important in the south-west, Mr. Speaker.  The number of wells that were 
drilled, as she mentioned, were nine in 1982.  Now there's well over 900 
wells being drilled.  We are self-sufficient in the gas industry, Mr. 
Speaker.  I would like to invite some of those people down to the 
south-west and see what's happening down in the south-west in the last nine 
years.  It has changed much just in the oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The direction this government has been taking is the main reason behind the 
tremendous growth in the entrepreneurial spirit that is strengthening this 
province.  And, Mr. Speaker, it could not have been done by a government 
that did not have a plan.  It could not have been done by a party that 
continues to refuse to give its position, Mr. Speaker, and I guess you 
might say flip-flopping through the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is being done by this government.  We have had to deal 
with some difficult questions.  Although we have seen a lot of success in 
diversification, the fact remains that we still depend on farming a great 
deal.  We still depend on rural Saskatchewan a great deal.  We have had to 
implement a plan to stabilize the economy in those areas, otherwise we 
would not have a provincial economy at all. 
 
Since 1982 this government has secured more than $7 billion to aid in 
farmers and have saved farmers more than $388 million in interest payments 
alone.  We have done more for Saskatchewan farmers than any other 
administration in the history of this province. 
 
When I say that, Mr. Speaker, about rural Saskatchewan, I am talking about 
individual line service, underground power, and natural gas.  It helped 
keep rural Saskatchewan the way it should be. 
 
(1600) 
 
Yet farmers are still having difficult times, Mr. Speaker.  And when you 
talk about drought and continuing low prices, we needed a plan that would 
stabilize the farm income, Mr. Speaker.  We went to the people with 
representatives to come up with a plan that would accomplish that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now for the first time, Mr. Speaker, we have a long-term safety net program 
that protects farmers from both low yields and low prices.  We have a 
program that allows farmers to invest in their own future similar to, you 
might say, an RRSP (registered retirement savings plan), called NISA (net 
income stabilization account). 
 
Along with a third line of defence, Mr. Speaker . . . when I say third line 
of defence, Mr. Speaker, I'm not so sure they know what a third line of 
defence is over there. It might be the top line of defence or the bottom 



 

 

line of defence.  I'm not sure which it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a program that gives farmers the opportunity to forecast a minimum 
income with numbers that they can take to the bank, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not 
sure they know anything about that either.  We've also looked at 
communities around the province that are struggling for their lives.  We 
looked at them and saw we needed something to stabilize their economy, 
something that could give the people the confidence to do what it takes to 
build and grow. 
 
We implemented a program that would do just that, Mr. Speaker, a program 
that would inject local money into local projects, a program that each 
citizen could take part in and say that he or she helped keep this 
community stay on the map. 
 
Community bonds, as my colleague mentioned -- I won't go into that -- they 
have helped rural Saskatchewan take initiative and develop new business 
industry through their community.  All we did, Mr. Speaker, when I mention 
that, was help them help themselves. 
 
We are continuing our plan to strengthen the rural economy by giving 
communities all over the province a chance to have a government office in 
their town.  Fair Share Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is met with more 
enthusiasm and optimism than anyone ever imagined.  I know there are a lot 
of communities in my constituency that are sending in their profiles and 
wanting their chance to share something that has, in effect, been theirs 
all along.  To do that, Mr. Speaker, is just to do it to make good sense, 
Mr. Speaker, and that's what it does, makes good sense. 
 
A plan, Mr. Speaker -- that is a term I am sure the members, like I say, 
from Riversdale which is responsible for that side of the House over there, 
is not familiar with, because a plan, Mr. Speaker, is a blueprint that you 
share with people because it is their lives that you are affecting.  And we 
have heard that member from Riversdale mention on numerous occasions that 
he is not willing to give up his position, like I said before . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the opportunity 
to get into this debate. 
 
I want to begin my remarks, first of all, Mr. Speaker, by pointing out that 
any plan or any strategy, the true test of that is what the results are.  
And today I want to outline briefly in the few moments that I have the 
results of the so-called plans that this government opposite and two 
members opposite have talked about. 
 
I want to first of all address the comment made by the member for Maple 
Creek.  The member for Maple Creek talked about how good things have been 
in her area of the province because of the government's plan.  Well I want 
to ask the member for Maple Creek to ask herself and ask her constituents 



 

 

whether the plan that the government had to shut down the ski facility in 
Cypress Hills was a good plan.  And I ask that member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where was she and where was the member from Shaunavon when they shut down 
that ski hill? 
 
And what did the minister from Canora use as an argument?  The minister 
from Canora used as an argument that the people should go over to the 
Alberta side to use that facility, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Now that is a plan 
to stabilize the Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker, I ask?  Of course it's 
not.  Of course. That's the plan that we're talking about.  That's the 
result I'm talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member for Maple Creek also said that the government had done such 
wonderful things with the mortgage protection plan.  One year ago they said 
it was going to be ten and a half per cent.  Without any forewarning, in a 
press release budget the minister announced just a few weeks ago, it's 
going up to thirteen and a half per cent. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's a plan that is not the kind of plan we need to 
stabilize our economy.  What's the result of all that?  The result is that 
in 1990 we have had the lowest housing starts in Saskatchewan since this 
province began to make a recording of the number of housing starts.  The 
average starts under the NDP administration was 7,954 a year.  The average 
starts under this administration has been 4,694 a year, and in 1990 it was 
1,417.  That is the result of that plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Of course the member also talked about -- both of them -- what wonderful 
things have happened to Saskatchewan because of their policy on oil 
royalties and the oil industry.  I won't get into that except to say this, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  What has been the benefit to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan?  Did it prevent the government from having to bring in a 
provincial GST of 7 per cent?  Did it bring down the deficit or reduce the 
debt of the province, Mr. Speaker?  Did it bring in balanced budgets, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker?  Of course not.  That is the plan they're talking about, 
and it should be judged, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the results.  And these are 
the results. 
 
This motion itself, and the things that both members have been talking 
about, is symbolic of how barren this government is of ideas and a plan for 
the future.  The fact that they started this legislative session without a 
throne speech is an example of the fact that they don't have a plan.  
Because what is a throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  A throne speech is an 
outline of the government's agenda for the forthcoming fiscal year. 
 
The fact that this government was not capable of having a throne speech 
shows that indeed there is no plan that this government has, other than 
trying to pull a rabbit out of the hat in order that it may hold an 
election sometime down the road, because it knows that without a rabbit out 
of the hat, their future as a government in this province is doomed.  
Because the people know and the people have caught up with the fact that 
they don't have a plan on how to deal with the problems that the people and 
the families of Saskatchewan face -- the high taxes that they pay, the lack 
of jobs that are forcing young people to leave Saskatchewan and go to other 



 

 

parts of the country. 
 
Well they've had announcements before.  And I want to read to you, Mr. 
Speaker, a notable journalist in Saskatchewan and what he said in the 
Leader-Post.  Mr. Dale Eisler said the following: 
 

 In other words, the industrial strategy was typical Devine-ism.  There 
were no details, no specifics, just clever theatrics. 

 
That's what's wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This has been the thing that the 
government has done in the place of an economic strategy.  Mr. Eisler, 
although he could have been talking about today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 
talking about when the government in 1982 launched the open-for-business 
economic strategy.  Words.  Just words. 
 
Well since then I want to read you all of the announced economic strategies 
to stabilize Saskatchewan that the government has had.  We've had the 
establishment of the Saskatchewan development committee in 1982, the 
Partnership for Progress in 1985 which targeted job creation as one of the 
four pillars of building the province.  Then we had the Free Trade 
Agreement of 1988 which was to have been the saviour of rural Saskatchewan.  
Remember that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And then the PCs' (Progressive Conservatives) privatization initiatives 
which were to revitalize our economy.  And then of course came along the 
immigrant investment funds and the community bonds of 1990.  They had some 
promise, but they couldn't even do that right, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They 
were going to rebuild the rural economy.  Then there was Consensus 
Saskatchewan in 1990 which was to set out long-term goals for the province.  
And then there was the report of the economic diversification council in 
1991 which set out a multiyear plan for economic recovery.  Well none of 
them were ever intended to do anything. 
 
When an election then approached, they announced yet another one and they 
called it diversification, or decentralization, I should say -- the D-word.  
They hardly ever mention it any more.  A cynical political announcement 
without any forethought or any analysis or any planning, announced on the 
eve of an election in the hope that somehow it might help the government 
restore some political credibility. 
 
The fact that neither of the members opposite spent any time on it at all 
tells you that they now realize, as has been said by many others, that it 
is seen as a political announcement and nothing more. 
 
Here is an editorial from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: 
 

 One thing that has been lacking in his discussion is a full analysis of 
the cost and benefits of the plan and what impact it will have on rural 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I'm sorry, that was Yorkton This Week, printed this week. 
 
Then there's the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: 



 

 

 
 What rural Saskatchewan needs most is income generating industry (Mr. 

Deputy Speaker).  If rural Saskatchewan is to survive it needs a better 
strategy than shuffling the present deck which is basically all a 
transferring of government departments would be. 

 
And then it goes on to say that: 
 

 Disease is not the dwindling population in rural Saskatchewan, that is the 
symptom.  The disease is Canada's agricultural policy which still clings 
to outdated notions. 

 
And then it goes on to say, it's a band-aid. 
 
These are not plans, Mr. Speaker.  Every year the government has announced 
some new strategy but never has followed through in implementing that 
strategy.  And that's why we have students leaving our province and that's 
why you have people moving somewhere else.  That's why our unemployment 
level is the highest it's been for a decade. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, most cynical of all, the government does have some plans.  
It has some plans for certain select people, which was recently disclosed 
when it was revealed by a memorandum from the Premier's office that the 
Premier . . . and I read now from a headline in the Leader-Post, "Devine's 
office tracking student job applicants." 
 
 DThey can't even be fair and honest, this government, with students who 
are looking to upgrade their education and looking for summer jobs.  They 
have to screen them in the Premier's office; the Premier screens them to 
determine whether they're going to get a job, depending on whether their 
parents made a contribution to the PC Party. 
 
And it doesn't end there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because after last summer 
every one of those students received a letter from the PC Party asking them 
to take out a PC membership.  And those students, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who 
did not take one out, this year are not being hired. 
 
That is the PC plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That is the PC plan, and that's 
why we face the situation that we face today. 
 
Where were they if they were interested in stabilizing rural Saskatchewan 
and rural communities?  Where were they when the two-price wheat system was 
being eliminated?  Silent.  Where were they when the farm fuel tax rebate 
of the federal government was being eliminated?  Silent.  Where were they 
when rural post offices were closed and are being closed?  Silent.  Where 
were they when the school-based children's dental plan, eliminating 276 
jobs in 77 rural communities, was eliminated by this government?  They said 
it was a good idea. 
 
That is the kind of plan we don't need, Mr. Speaker, and that's why I want 
to move this amendment to the motion that the member opposite moved just a 
few moments ago.  Because this amendment better reflects what this 
government has been up to in the last nine years.  And I move it, seconded 



 

 

by my colleague the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake: 
 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 condemns the government for failing to provide a positive, stable overall 

business climate and for imposing an immense tax burden which has resulted 
in an unprecedented number of business bankruptcies; and furthermore 

 
 that the government has endangered many of the established democratic 

institutions and traditions of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the few 
short moments that I have to speak in support of the amendment to this 
motion, I want to deal with this government's supposed comprehensive plan 
to stabilize communities in Saskatchewan.  And I want to speak 
specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to my community. 
 
I want to go back a couple of weeks ago.  I opened a paper on a Thursday 
afternoon, and to my surprise the column indicates that there are going to 
be 30 jobs lost at MacDonalds Consolidated.  Is that part of this 
comprehensive plan, I ask myself? 
 
I turn the page over and in the same day it's indicated that 20 rural post 
offices are going to be closed in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to myself, clearly this looks like the government's plan from 
1982 until 1991 because it's been an ongoing scenario, Mr. Speaker, where 
businesses have been closing, where out-migration has been unparalleled, 
where the deficit has been mounting.  And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that clearly that is the comprehensive plan of this government.  And if it 
isn't, I would ask any of the members on that side to stand up and refute 
those facts, because I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's exactly 
what's happened. 
 
A couple of days later I opened the paper -- as a matter of fact, I believe 
it was yesterday in the Star-Phoenix -- 616 business bankruptcies in this 
province in the year of 1990.  And I say to you, is that part of this 
comprehensive plan? 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague indicated, the mover of this amendment indicated, 
that you have gone through announcement after announcement of plan after 
plan, but what's been happening?  The deficit has been increasing.  People 



 

 

have been leaving this province to find employment in other jurisdictions.  
Taxes have increased.  You're screening summer employment for students 
through the Premier's office.  Mr. Speaker, that's not the vision of a 
province that the people of this province were looking for in 1982 when 
this government was elected. 
 
I note today in my clippings a headline from the Star-Phoenix . . . or 
Leader-Post, I'm sorry, talking about rural school closures.  And I want to 
quote from this:  "Losing a rural school spells the end of a community.  We 
know of 24 schools closing -- that's 24 communities and one big blow." 
 
And that's this year, Mr. Speaker, and that is a quote from a member of 
this province, a citizen of this province, who can clearly tell that the 
closure of these schools is going to mean a negative impact on 24 rural 
communities. 
 
And where has this government been, Mr. Speaker?  Cutting back on revenue 
sharing to school boards throughout this province.  And that's the result. 
That's the result of school boards having to deal with a lack of funds.  
That's the result of school boards having to deal with the new federal 
goods and services tax that your federal counterparts introduced, and the 
increased costs because of those.  That's the result of the introduction of 
a provincial goods and services tax which the Minister of Finance so 
ceremoniously announced outside of the legislature a few weeks ago. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province understand what 
the comprehensive plan of this government is.  The comprehensive plan 
appears to be, sir, one of a scorched-earth policy. 
 
I indicated that I wanted to talk about this comprehensive plan that the 
member from Maple Creek spoke of to stabilize communities and to protect 
the provincial economy. 
 
Well let me tell you about what's happened and some of the protection 
that's happened in my own community where a number of your constituents, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, support when they're shopping in our community.  We've 
lost . . . and I just want to go through a list of the wholesalers and this 
comprehensive plan of stabilizing our economy in Prince Albert.  We've lost 
MacDonald's Consolidated; we've lost Scott National; we've lost Western 
Grocers; we've lost Fayerman Brothers; we've lost Grosser & Glass; we've 
lost Buckwold's.  That's six. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, Grosser & Glass was a business that 
operated in our community, not for 10 years or 15 years, but for decades.  
Even through the Liberal years they survived.  But they couldn't survive 
the scorched 
_earth policy of this Tory regime.  They closed their doors and they left. 
 
And I want to say to you, the outfitters who are depending on the 
wholesalers to supply them during the summer months out of Prince Albert 
are going to find increased costs.  And I would suggest you know that as 
well as I do.  And where has this government been? 
 



 

 

The workers who are involved in the closure of MacDonald's went to see the 
Minister of Labour, and he says to them, well he's going to have a look at 
it.  He doesn't talk their language. I mean they're working folks.  He 
understands the big business angle and he's going to sit down with 
MacDonald's Consolidated and talk to them; he understands big business.  I 
tell you what he understands -- he understands Cargill and he understands 
Weyerhaeuser and he understands Peter Pocklington, but he doesn't 
understand the working people of this province. 
 
And I challenge this government to bring those issues before an electorate.  
Call an election so that we can determine who's going to lead this province 
in the 1990s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, this comprehensive plan has meant 
unemployment has doubled since 1981 in this province.  Even with the 
out-migration, the number of people who are actively seeking employment in 
this province has doubled.  Can you imagine that?  Can you imagine, if the 
people who left this province had stayed in this province and looked for 
employment, what the figure would be? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that this government hasn't had a plan or 
they would have been able to deal with that.  They should have had a plan.  
They should have had a comprehensive plan to keep the social assistance 
roles from sky-rocketing and from expanding the way they have, over doubled 
from 1982. 
 
But where have they been?  They've been dealing with the Cargills, putting 
at risk the almost $400 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money.  Have 
they been working with the Saskatchewan business community?  I say to you 
that they haven't.  I say to you that they've totally ignored the 
Saskatchewan business community who would, who could, and who will, with a 
new regime, develop job opportunities for the people of this province.  And 
we won't be hinged to the coat-tails of Cargill and of Weyerhaeuser and of 
Peter Pocklington.  I can assure you that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to indicate to you as well 
another little example of how this comprehensive plan of yours has failed.  
Last month in my community in Prince Albert, not one single housing start; 
not one two by four; not one lot developed; not one new house built. And at 
the same time the contractors in that community and in others throughout 
this province are looking for opportunities to get back to work and to be 
looking after their families. 
 
But what have you offered?  What has this government offered?  They've 
offered a plan that they call decentralization that by the Manitoba 
experience is clearly not economically viable.  That's what they've 
offered. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government was concerned about 



 

 

rural communities, you'd do something about post office closures and you'd 
do something about schools closing in those small communities.  And you'd 
do something.  You would have said something instead of sitting idly by as 
they rip the dental workers out of those communities, good paying jobs; and 
when they gave away the Highways equipment to their friends and put those 
people out of work who used to live in those communities. 
 
And I want to talk to you about your own community of Shellbrook, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  As you are aware, there was about a half a dozen workers 
for the Department of Highways that were gainfully employed with that 
department, spending their payroll in the town of Shellbrook.  And where 
are they now, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Where were they and what did their MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) say?  I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, those jobs were gone.  Those payrolls were gone and their MLA said 
nothing. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, shame, shame on this government.  That kind of a 
delivery of decentralization Tory style is clear throughout this province.  
You've taken a thousand well paying jobs out of rural Saskatchewan in the 
last few years and all you've replaced it with, sir, is higher taxes to 
those school boards, a lower tax base for the businesses because there are 
so many of them that have closed.  That's what you've done for rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you drive through the small towns in Saskatchewan 
and you have a look at the small grocery stores that have closed; you look 
at new post office buildings that have had their windows boarded up with 
plywood, fresh plywood; you look at those jobs being lost and those 
opportunities for Saskatchewan's rural people being lost.  And this 
government says nothing.  I say to you . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time is up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was in Prince Albert last 
week and giving them some money for the sports that they're going to have 
there next summer.  And I was talking with . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  All members will have an opportunity 
to speak.  I'd ask you to allow this member to speak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, my department of sport, culture, and 
recreation had a commitment to the Prince Albert Summer Games Committee to 
give them a certain amount of money to organize and run their games.  And 
so while I was there in Prince Albert, I had an opportunity to talk to a 
number of people about what they thought about government agencies or 
portions of government departments moving into Prince Albert. 
 
While, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how many . . . certainly I was talking to 
a crowd of a dozen people or so.  They thought . . . And it's interesting 
that one of the members from Prince Albert . . . and I see the other one 
would speak about how bad the decentralization is. 
 
I suggest to him, Mr. Speaker, that he go back to Prince Albert and he walk 



 

 

up and down the street in Prince Albert and talk to the mayor and talk to 
the councillors and talk to the people who operate the stores in Prince 
Albert, and ask them how they feel about the possibility of many, many 
people coming into that community at government wages and all the benefits 
that government employees have.  I suggest to him, Mr. Speaker, that he is 
not paying attention to the people of Prince Albert. 
 
Two weeks ago I was in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, and I was talking to 
the mayor and some of the councillors in North Battleford and also 
Battleford about the possibility . . . what they felt about 
decentralization, about people leaving Regina and going into North 
Battleford and Battleford.  He thought it was a great idea and as do 
everybody else that I spoke to in North Battleford and Battleford as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people outside the city of Regina think that 
decentralization is a wonderful idea.  Now let's talk about the city of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker.  Let's talk about the city . . . what it means to the 
city of Regina.  Well there's a possibility that people from Regina will be 
going out to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Let's talk about what it means to Regina if rural Saskatchewan ceases to 
exist.  What happens if towns like Carlyle and towns like Pangman and towns 
like Ogema and towns like Milestone or Weyburn or Estevan, or all these 
other communities out here in southern Saskatchewan, what does it mean to 
the people of Regina if those communities cease to exist, Mr. Speaker, if 
they no longer need services from the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 47 . . . there is something in the neighbourhood of 
87,000 jobs in this city, something like 87,000 jobs of everybody in the 
city working.  Fifty per cent of those jobs are directly related to 
servicing southern Saskatchewan.  So you sit across on the opposite side 
and you say decentralization is bad.  I say to you, you go talk to the 
truck drivers that belong to all those transport companies around the city.  
You ask them what they think about not driving the truck out to Carlyle or 
not driving the truck out to Pangman or down to Weyburn or down to Estevan.  
You talk to them. 
 
Let me give you some facts.  Let's look at some of the facts, Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, over 300 million of Regina's total 1990 retail sales comes 
directly from rural Saskatchewan.  That's nearly 17 per cent of Regina's 
total retail income comes from rural Saskatchewan.  Many of the employees 
that I talked about who represent and service southern Saskatchewan are in 
the agricultural business.  Agriculture Canada, for instance, has 136 
employees; Agriculture and Food, that's a provincial department, has 180 
employees; Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has 550 employees; Dairy Producers 
Co-operative Ltd. has 193 employees, Mr. Chairman; Credit Union Central has 
371 employees. 
 
Now let's just take something like the Federated Co-operatives of Regina.  
And just a point, Mr. Speaker, before I fail to mention it.  In the yellow 
pages in the Regina telephone book there are 10 pages of transport 
companies.  Now those transport companies service southern Saskatchewan.  
They don't service northern Saskatchewan, they service southern 



 

 

Saskatchewan -- 10 pages of transport companies.  I think it's time that 
the people who drive those trucks, the people who work on the docks and 
distribute that food out to . . . and the clothes and all the other 
materials that go out to southern Saskatchewan, I think it's time they took 
a look at what these people are talking about here, Mr. Speaker.  They 
don't want those jobs to go out into southern Saskatchewan.  They don't 
want communities in southern Saskatchewan to be strong, to be positive. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you've got Federated Co-operatives, Regina, head office, 
incorporated in Saskatoon.  The Regina region services 101 retail outlets 
-- 101 retail outlets in south central Saskatchewan.  There are 340 co-ops 
in western Canada, Mr. Speaker.  Based on a figure of 4.5 full-time jobs 
for a million dollars in sales in 1989, the Co-op employed the equivalent 
of 1,800 full-time employees in the Regina region. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it may be time for those 1,800 full-time employees 
with the Federated Co-operatives in Regina to start listening to what this 
side is talking about rather than what that side is talking about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If they have their way there will be no decentralization; they will allow 
southern Saskatchewan to die -- Weyburn, Ogema, Pangman, Milestone, all 
those towns in southern Saskatchewan, these people serviced, Mr. Speaker.  
They won't need any warehouse jobs if there are no trucks, if we don't need 
the trucks to deliver them.  There'll be no truck drivers driving trucks 
into southern Saskatchewan. 
 
If you want to have an impact of what Regina is as a distribution centre in 
southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you stand on the outskirts of this city 
on a Monday morning.  Go down on south Albert, go out on east Victoria, go 
out anywhere in this city, and you watch all those trucks driving out of 
this city.  Where are they going, Mr. Speaker?  They're going to rural 
Saskatchewan.  They're going to small town Saskatchewan.  They're going to 
co-op stores, they're going to hardware stores, they're going to clothing 
stores, they're going to restaurants -- all of those in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If we do not strengthen southern Saskatchewan, we don't need 50 per cent of 
the people that are now working in Regina.  And it's time that the city of 
Regina, the city council, started waking up to that fact instead of 
condemning the things that this government's trying to do, instead of 
condemning all the things and not supporting what this party, what this 
government has done for this city in the last nine years, they should start 
thinking about what it would mean to this city if we did not diversify or 
if we did not have trucks going out to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1630) 
 
Let me just talk about what has happened in the city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, in the last few years.  It's very obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the 
upgrader . . . I mean I don't even have to mention the upgrader.  
Unfortunately, the city of Regina city council did not support the 
upgrader, Mr. Speaker.  They did not support the upgrader because the 



 

 

majority of people sitting in the Regina city council support the NDP.  And 
why do they support . . . And so therefore they're not going to support 
anything this government does. 
 
I mean that's how near-sighted these people are, Mr. Speaker.  That's how 
near-sighted they are.  They're more concerned about supporting the people 
on the other side who oppose everything, have no plan whatsoever, Mr. 
Speaker, than they are in supporting their own town. 
 
The worst thing that's wrong with Regina is the attitude, Mr. Speaker.  If 
we had a positive attitude in this city like some other centres in western 
Canada have, we could do wonderful things in this city, far more than has 
already been done. 
 
Which isn't to say, Mr. Speaker, that a great deal hasn't already been 
done.  One talks about the upgrader.  One talks about Saskoil.  You talk 
about WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker.  You talk about the money that's been spent 
on the rail line relocation, construction of 1,232 housing units in Regina, 
creating almost 1,100 jobs in this community, Mr. Speaker.  And it just 
goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the problems we have, Mr. Speaker, as I said, is that this 
government . . . or the members of the opposition are so busy being 
negative they don't have time to develop a plan.  Let me quote from an 
in-house piece that came from the NDP. 
 
This is from Owen Sebastian in the Young NDP newspaper called The 
Communique pé: 
 

 You would think we would have learned from the 1986 campaign.  We 
obviously have not.  All we did was say how bad and evil the Tories were.  
Instead of offering a real alternative, all we did was say we would 
restore the dental plan at a time when rural Saskatchewan is being 
decimated by low grain prices.  People, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, have no reason to vote for us. 

 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the city of Regina 
have no reason to vote for the members who they have supported in the past 
representing the NDP government, because they do not support things that 
have been good for this city. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you want to drive down Highway No. 1 west a few miles, 
you'll come to something called Saferco.  That's a fertilizer plant, Mr. 
Speaker.  It's a fertilizer plant, and it's owned by Cargill.  Now the 
members of the opposition . . . and a really interesting twist, Mr. 
Speaker, was when they supported, the NDP supported the Americans in the 
American fertilizer industry in opposition to the project that this 
government has put out there at Saferco. 
 
There will be very shortly something in the neighbourhood of 1,500 people 
working out at Saferco in building that plant, Mr. Speaker.  Those people 
live in Moose Jaw; those people live in Regina. 
 



 

 

I remember very clearly the member from Moose Jaw saying, first of all, no 
way he was going to support . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Time has elapsed. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  May I remind people that the 
motion that we're debating this afternoon, it's been brought in from the 
member from Maple Creek, and it says: 
 

 That this Assembly commend the government for preparing and implementing a 
comprehensive plan to stabilize Saskatchewan communities, protect the 
provincial economy, diversify the province, and reform the institutions 
and practice of government in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the government members opposite that the only phrase 
to use for a motion like this, coming from the government opposite, is that 
it's appalling and unmitigated gall.  Absolute gall to think that you can 
say that you have saved Saskatchewan communities.  And I say this on behalf 
of the people across the province that I've spoken to in the many 
communities that I visited as a critic for senior's issues and I say it on 
behalf of the people that I represent in the city of Saskatoon, in 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
This government's plan to stabilize Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker, 
does not appear to include the cities of Regina and Saskatoon as part of 
the Saskatchewan community, because those two cities will be devastated by 
the . . . have been -- Saskatoon's been devastated already.  You walk down 
2nd Avenue and the streets and the shops that have gone into receivership 
and the businesses that have closed as a result of the policies of this 
government.  And the city of Regina that will be devastated if they move 
the government programs the way that they're proposing to do. 
 
Regina and Saskatoon are part of the Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker, 
and they deserve to be protected as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- It's also interesting to note that the people who have spoken 
from the government side have talked a lot about the things that they've 
done in the past.  And it's the past that has created the chaos that we 
have now, the past nine years of this PC government in Saskatchewan, have 
created absolute chaos, and we don't in any way see any moves to create 
anything that would stabilize the communities in this province, from this 
government. 
 
That's why I'm pleased to be speaking in support of the amendment that's 
been brought in by those of us in the opposition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 We condemn the government for failing to provide a positive, stable, 

overall business climate and for imposing an immense tax burden which has 



 

 

resulted in an unprecedented number of business bankruptcies and, 
furthermore, that the government has endangered many of the established 
democratic institutions and traditions of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I support that amendment.  I want to 
focus my attention on part of this motion that no one on the government 
side has addressed, and that's the statement that says that the government 
has endangered many of the established democratic institutions and 
traditions of the province of Saskatchewan in our amendment.  The 
government is saying they've reformed the institutions and practice of 
government in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it's really important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we look at this 
word "reform" because the government opposite has been twisting the English 
language, among many other things it has been doing, as it presents ideas 
to the people of Saskatchewan.  There is no way that we can say what the 
government has been doing reforms the institutions and practice of 
government in Saskatchewan. 
 
The word "reform" means to restore to a former good state, to bring from 
bad to good, to amend or improve by change of form or by removal of faults 
or abuses, to bring an end to evil by enforcing or introducing a better 
method or a course of action or behaviour. 
 
Now the government has been trying to say it's going to bring in democratic 
reforms -- and it needs to do that -- but this government certainly will 
not. 
 
We just have a number of examples of government behaviour recently that in 
no way demonstrates reform, if you take the meaning of the word "reform" to 
be the conventional meaning of the word in the English language.  But this 
government opposite, as the supporters of the Reform Party, take the word 
"reform" and turn it into something quite the opposite to what it's always 
meant to us in the English language. 
 
And the member from Melville certainly began that when he reformed Social 
Services and made it a much more hateful system for so many people who are 
on very low incomes and needing help in this province.  This is not reform, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This is not reform at all. 
 
First of all, the government, if it was going to reform, would have 
released recently, as it's been asked to do by the city of Regina, the 
plans for their decentralization proposal to show why it's a good thing.  
These plans are still kept secret, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and secrecy is not 
reform of government.  Secrecy is a backward step.  Being secret in 
government is the tool of people who are afraid to speak and to tell us 
what they're up to, and it's a tool of repression. It is not reform. 
 
Get those plans, get those proposals, that analysis of the benefits of your 
decentralization out to the people of Saskatchewan.  Tell the city of 
Regina what you found out about decentralization.  Why are you hiding it?  



 

 

You're hiding it; you won't let them know. And that is part of your 
secrecy. 
 
The other thing the government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance is again yelling from his seat as 
he always does.  Mr. Speaker, I think . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I call the member from Moose Jaw North to 
order and allow the member to continue with her speech.  Member from Moose 
Jaw North, allow the member from Saskatoon to continue her speech. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Well I would like to call the member from Weyburn to order, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I would like to say that the reason why he's 
probably making so much noise is because I'm about to mention what he has 
done as the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- He has brought in this 7 per cent provincial tax which is 
opposed by people all across the province.  And if you are going to reform 
the government in Saskatchewan, you would listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan who are telling you that that's a rotten tax.  It's one they 
don't want.  It's hurting businesses all across all the communities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We presented petitions to indicate that people in the restaurant business 
in all the small towns are terribly worried about this, that people running 
the library systems all across the province are terribly worried about this 
tax.  The small businesses are going to be very badly hurt and the Minister 
of Finance is responsible for this and has the gall to support a government 
motion that calls this stabilizing our communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This minister opposite, this Minister of Finance, has also made an 
appalling move in bringing in special warrants to spend money before the 
legislature was sitting and could debate it in an interim supply Bill.  
That's another example, not of reform of government institutions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but of a failure to respect government institutions and 
wanting to go behind the back of the legislature and bring in decisions 
that are being made outside of the legislature. 
 
Another very serious move by this government throughout the years that 
we've been here in the House on the opposite side and watched them work -- 
secrecy, bringing things in behind the backs of the legislature, failing to 
debate.  We had an example just today when a Bill was brought in by press 
release, a Bill relating to referendums and plebiscite, brought in with an 
embargo on it.  We have not . . . we could not see the legislation and they 
call that respect of this institution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Minister for Finance is saying that the goods and services tax will 
have to be collected even though it's illegal at this point, until the 
legislation is passed, and he's not going to protect the small businesses 
that are so badly hurt by this. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government just tabled Public Accounts after 14 months of 
holding them back, and they call that reform.  That's just a recent action 
from a government that has been, over the years, as I've said, doing things 
that really have destroyed our political institutions. 
 
We also have noticed just lately that the Principal case is still going on 
in the courts, dragging on and on, and the government is refusing to help 
the people who lost their money in Principal Trust.  In fact, this 
government has destroyed the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, 
which was a department that consumers could focus on and a department that 
the Principal Trust people were working with, and now that's gone.  Gone 
again.  Another change. 
 
And all these changes that I've mentioned have just been brought in 
recently, but it goes back a long time.  It goes back a long time.  One of 
the changes that this government brought in, in 1986 when I was first 
elected in this House, was when it brought in the executive government 
reorganization Act, Bill 5.  That Bill was an unprecedented transfer of 
power from the legislature to the provincial cabinet. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have to ask the hon. members to 
please allow the member from Saskatoon Centre the opportunity to speak. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's part of the lack of respect for this 
legislature that when it is the government members opposite who are causing 
the disruption, that they are not named in speaking to them.  The lack of 
respect for the legislative procedures in this House from the government 
opposite is really appalling.  And we are seeing examples of it every 
minute as we're working here today.  And we have seen examples of it in the 
last few days here, as well as over the last years.  The government . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Muller: -- I am pleased today to address the Assembly and certainly 
support the motion.  I won't be supporting the amendment brought in by the 
member for Regina North East, but I certainly will be supporting the 
motion. 
 
The motion provides us with ground rules for the basis of our future, Mr. 
Speaker.  Let's take a look at the motion. 
 
It starts to talk about implementing a comprehensive plan, a comprehensive 
plan, Mr. Speaker, for all the people of Saskatchewan, from a farmer to a 
business man, teacher, to mothers at home, labourers to business owners, 
and rural and urban. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it talks about stabilizing our communities through initiatives 
such as Fair Share Saskatchewan, which I'll speak further on in a moment; 
stabilizing and ensuring that the quality of life we enjoy in this province 



 

 

is protected -- indeed, Mr. Speaker, enhanced; stabilizing through 
additional programs for our youth, our families, our elderly, and for all 
of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The plan is about protecting the provincial economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I'll have to call the member for Regina 
North West to order and ask him to allow the member to continue his speech 
-- and the member from Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Protecting our agricultural 
sector through the long-term guaranteed income and insurance programs, GRIP 
and NISA; providing long-term security never before experienced on the 
farm. 
 
And this is typical, Mr. Speaker, of the opposition.  As soon as the 
government has something good to talk about, they try and interrupt.  And 
as soon as I try and talk about the GRIP and NISA programs, they're 
certainly over there trying to interrupt me.  And they certainly don't 
understand it, know anything about it and that's why . . . They're against 
everything.  Certainly they even made comments about me not wearing my 
glasses in my pictures, but I see some of the members over there on the 
other side of the House that even take their glasses off when they're 
speaking.  So I mean . . . So anyway I guess some of them are ashamed of 
how they look with glasses on.  But they seem to want . . . They don't seem 
to want to hear my words of wisdom; they want to interrupt.  So I guess 
they . . . I don't know what they had in their glasses this afternoon but . 
. . 
 
Mr. Speaker, GRIP and NISA provide long-term security never before 
experienced on our farms.  And, Mr. Speaker, protecting through additional 
talks at the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) table, 
continuing to fight for our agricultural economy -- all of which is 
important. 
 
The plan also talks about diversifying the province, Mr. Speaker, through 
important programs, whether community bonds or the Saferco fertilizer plant 
or other steps that have already been taken by this government.  I'm proud 
today to be able to boast of a 700 per cent increase in manufacturing -- 
700 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  Now that's diversification, Mr. Speaker.  
That's growth, growth when we were facing . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . The members opposite say that . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I believe the House has reached the 
point that it might be more appropriate to call it 5 o'clock.  The members 
have been speaking.  Please allow the member to speak. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Growth, Mr. Speaker, when we're facing the most difficult 
economic times we've seen since the dirty thirties.  Growth, Mr. Speaker, 
that didn't happen by accident.  Growth that has happened as the result of 
a plan.  And part of this plan, Mr. Speaker, includes government reform -- 
reform through such measures as plebiscites and referendums which will give 
the people of Saskatchewan direct access to the government and a voice in 



 

 

their own future. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, it's ironic that members opposite me like 
to keep talking about opening the books.  It's ironic because prior to our 
taking over in 1982, the government of the day maintained the practice of 
holding Public Accounts meetings in private. 
 
Well, I've been on the Public Accounts Committee off and on for the last 
eight or nine years and we've always had the press involved in the Public 
Accounts.  Prior to 1982 I didn't even know that they weren't public.  I 
didn't know that when I first came here, but now I understand that they 
held their Public Accounts meetings in private and never let the press in.  
So I mean how could anybody be critical of what they were doing?  They 
never told anybody anything. 
 
We opened these proceedings to the public.  Yes, we opened these 
proceedings to the media.  They have their chairs right in the Public 
Accounts meetings.  They can come in and sit through the meetings, listen 
to what's done in there, and it's all on verbatim.  They can read it.  I 
mean we have it open to the public and the press.  The public can come in 
and listen to the Public Accounts meetings. 
 
We reformed.  They talked.  They say we haven't done any reform measures.  
We started back in 1982.  We've done it in a slow and methodical way, that 
we know we're going in the right direction.  But they don't see that. 
 
And we've reformed in other ways too, Mr. Speaker, like Fair Share 
Saskatchewan, bringing the government closer to the people.  We reformed 
through community bonds.  Saskatchewan communities now have the chance to 
decide what economic development projects they can work on and be a part of 
their own towns and villages. 
 
And you, Mr. Speaker, are a further example of the reforms undertaken by 
this government by coming the first elected Speaker of the House.  Now I 
know that your filling in for the Speaker now, but certainly he is, he is 
the first elected Speaker in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan.  And 
now he takes time off to go to tea.  At any rate, it is a step forward to 
have an elected Speaker in the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- All of these reforms are important, Mr. Speaker, and have 
been taking place for many years through various initiatives brought about 
by this government since 1982, from bringing natural gas and individual 
telephone line service to rural areas of Saskatchewan to the election of 
the Speaker.  Those are the kinds of things that the real people want. 
 
I remember back in 1981 when we didn't have enough gas in this province to 
bring natural gas to anybody.  But now of course, we've been drilling gas 
wells; we've got an infrastructure that is delivering gas to a lot of rural 
communities. 
 
I also know that . . . funny, one of my communities, I think its the 



 

 

community of Candle Lake, is one of the first resort areas that are going 
to be getting natural gas this summer, and they're already over-subscribed.  
They were going to do it in three years and now they've bumped it up and 
going to do it in two years because everybody out there at the lake wants 
to have natural gas to their cabins and use it winter and summer.  And if 
that isn't important to tourism in this part of the country, I wonder what 
is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Take one example of reform from the plan today, Mr. Speaker, 
Fair Share Saskatchewan.  I've been talking to people all around the 
constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River, and I can assure you people are 
working hard in towns like Smeaton, Shellbrook, Canwood, Choiceland, Meath 
Park to ensure we get a fair share of the government offices in my part of 
the world, in their part of the world. 
 
Fair Share Saskatchewan is a vital part of the plan, Mr. Speaker.  Vital 
because . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Member's time has elapsed. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 
 


