





























































Hansard: June 07, 1991


 

 

June 7/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following petitions that 
were presented on June 6, and under rule 11(7), find them to be in order 
and they are hereby read and received: 
 

 Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that your 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the 
provincial GST; 

 
 Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
reverse its decision to tax reading materials. 

 
 And of certain residents of the province praying that your Assembly may be 

pleased to urge the Provincial Government to properly fund and provide 
in-patient facilities such as Myers House in Regina. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a privilege for me today to 
introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly 16 students from 
Dickson School in Swift Current.  Dickson School has been an important part 
of my family.  Dickson School was where all three of my boys went and they 
became a part of that school, and I want to welcome the students.  And by 
the way, they were all in grade 4 there at one point in time.  And so I 
want to welcome the students. 
 
I'll be meeting with you at 11 o'clock to have some pictures.  And I want 
to welcome the teachers, Mr. Phillips and Mr. Mah; and the chaperons, Mrs. 
Rempel, Mrs. Kent, and Mrs. Burgess.  And I want to thank you for coming. 
 
I understand in Swift Current today it's raining; everything's been 
cancelled in Swift Current, so you're fortunate to be here perhaps.  And I 
want the members of the Assembly to join us in welcoming these students to 
Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to make an introduction to you, and through you to all members 
of the Assembly.  Seated in your gallery is a gentleman who is becoming 
increasingly more known throughout the province with environmental matters.  
Under ministerial statements I will be making an announcement with respect 
to Don Somers, who is seated in your gallery. 
 



 

 

Don is from Saskatoon, and I will be making a more formal statement 
respecting his involvement in the environment and business a little later 
on.  I'd ask all members to join with me in welcoming Don Somers to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the minister in welcoming Don to the Assembly.  Don is a 
constituent of mine and he's also . . . he and I are both members of 
McClure United Church, and so I want to join the minister and welcome you 
here, Don.  I hope you enjoy the proceedings and have a successful day. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and to the members of 
the legislature, I'd like to introduce to you a tour group visiting from 
Borden and Radisson schools, grades 3 and 4.  There's 33 students.  They're 
located in the west gallery. 
 
They're accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Assman, Mrs. Buswell, Mrs. 
Meister, Mrs. Mueller, Mrs. Hamp, Mrs. Hamm, and Mrs. Joncas. 
 
I will be meeting with the students for pictures at 11 a.m. and for 
refreshments after and any questions that you want to ask about the 
legislature.  I hope that they find this morning's proceedings educational 
and entertaining. 
 
Borden and Radisson schools, Mr. Speaker, have been promoting tourism by 
coming to Regina over the last few years and visiting the legislature and 
other points of interest in Regina.  I'd like to ask the members to make 
our guests from Redberry welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like 
to join with my colleagues in welcoming all of the students that are with 
us this morning. 
 
But it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce two guests who are 
seated in your gallery this morning, Dr. Barry Earl and Mr. John Chyzowski 
from the LEADS organization, which stands for the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors, and Superintendents, in this province.  And 
these two gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, have been very involved over the last 
several months in working with their colleagues in drafting legislation 
which I'm going to have the pleasure of introducing a little bit later -- 
the LEADS Act. 
 
And I would ask all members in the legislature this morning to join with me 
in giving a warm welcome to our two special guests here this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join the 
minister in welcoming the two members from LEADS, in particular Dr. Barry 
Earl and John Chyzowski. 
 
I'd like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that Dr. Barry Earl was a high school 
teacher at Walter Murray way back in the '60s when I was a student.  I can 
assure the members of the legislature, he was an excellent science teacher 
at Walter Murray Collegiate.  And I'm pleased to see Dr. Earl in the 
legislature today.  Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I would be somewhat remiss if I didn't 
welcome John here.  John and I go back a fair number of years when we were 
colleagues . . . Well over the years we have amassed a lot of wisdom 
together, John. 
 
John and I were colleagues together at Holy Cross High School.  And I 
welcome John here, and also Barry.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I guess I would 
like to join with the member opposite as well in welcoming John here.  Our 
relationship goes back a fair amount of years as well. 
 
But my primary objective, Mr. Speaker, is to introduce to you and through 
you, Mr. Speaker, to the other members of the Assembly, a group of 41 grade 
11 and 12 students from my home town of Hague where of course I spent many 
years teaching as well. 
 
I know many of these students personally because they are . . . many of 
them are neighbours of mine and so on.  And I would in particular like to 
welcome Margi Corbett as one of their teachers here. I taught together with 
Margi for a number of years.  And also Grant Ellce who is one other teacher 
that is here.  And also Henry Unger I see is up there as the bus driver.  I 
know these people very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've also had the opportunity over the last month or so to be 
in the Hague High School where I met with these students.  And let me 
assure you, Mr. Speaker, these students are very astute when it comes to 
politics.  They've asked some very piercing questions and I had a great 
time with them.  I look forward to taking pictures at 10:30 after question 
period and meeting with them later over drinks for questions and so on. 
 
They were in here yesterday already so they spent a couple of days in 
Regina.  I hope you're enjoying yourselves.  I hope you find it 
informative.  And I look forward to meeting with you later.  I ask all 
members to join with me in greeting and welcoming the students from Hague 
High School. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- I also have an introduction.  It's my pleasure this morning 
to introduce to the Legislative Assembly two special guests from New South 
Wales, Australia.  They are the Hon. John Johnson, president of the 
Legislative Council of New South Wales; and Mr. John Evans, Clerk of the 
Parliaments and Clerk of the Legislative Council of New South Wales. 
 
These parliamentary visitors are here in Saskatchewan to meet members and 
staff of the Assembly and to discuss a wide range of parliamentary issues.  
I will be meeting with Speaker Johnson and Mr. Evans shortly after question 
period this morning.  On your behalf and on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, let us welcome 
Speaker Johnson and Mr. Evans. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Election Date 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier, outside of this legislature I might 
add, told members of the media that he would be not prepared to go to an 
election and to call an election for at least two months and possibly even 
as long as November of 1991. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is this:  Mr. Deputy Premier, given the Supreme 
Court's ruling of yesterday, given the commitment of your Attorney General 
of March 19, 1991, what possible good reason could there be to yet again 
frustrate the demands of the people of the province of Saskatchewan to have 
an election now -- four years, eight months into your mandate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I assure the hon. member they will have 
their opportunity for an election.  What the Premier said very clearly 
yesterday based on the . . . and the Supreme Court, obviously came down 
with a decision, gave some legality to the boundaries, the 1989 boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will have an election.  The Premier 
clearly said that there will be an election in a manner . . . (inaudible) . 
. . The business of this House, Mr. Speaker, the business of this House for 
a good number of weeks has been held up by hon. members opposite, led by 
that member who just asked the question -- delays, obstruction, whatever. 
 
There is an agenda that we have laid before the public of Saskatchewan, a 
plan we've laid before the public of Saskatchewan.  Something I would 
invite the hon. member to do in his own right -- lay his plan before the 
public of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have referendum legislation to come forward, medical professional 
legislation regarding rural doctors.  We've got The Teachers' 



 

 

Superannuation Act which is before the House.  We have energy sector 
legislation dealing with horizontal drilling.  All of those things are 
important to the various sectors of this province.  All of those things are 
part of the agenda of the House.  They will be dealt with and we'll have an 
election. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Deputy Premier.  
I guess, Mr. Speaker, that the Deputy Premier is confirming that which the 
Premier said yesterday outside the House and the Attorney General said 
inside the House, and that is that the commitment of March 19 in a letter 
to myself and to the people of Saskatchewan is out the window.  That the 
promise that the boundaries, if decided by the Supreme Court, would be the 
basis of the election, is out the window.  That's the commitment that you 
made, and I guess you're confirming that that again is yet another broken 
promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy Premier is this: why won't you 
recognize that another four months of your policies, the scorched earth 
policies of this government are harming Saskatchewan people almost beyond 
repair?  Why can't you recognize that?  Why don't you acknowledge that the 
people of this province want an election and they want it now.  Get on with 
the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I would invite the hon. member as they 
have finally decided to do at 1 o'clock last night, to deal with the 
business of this House.  We've laid out the agenda for the House, the 
agenda for the House and for this spring session.  And those Bills that I 
made reference to in my first . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Those Bills which are before the House which I made 
reference to in my earlier answer, Mr. Speaker, important Bills for the 
province -- they are, I don't believe, controversial in any way.  I'd 
invite the leader of the obstructionist party opposite to deal with these 
Bills, deal with them as we go forward on this thing. 
 
We deal quickly with the legislation, Mr. Speaker.  We have an agenda 
before us.  The public of Saskatchewan has an agenda before them. 
 
As it relates to the boundaries, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General made it 
very clear yesterday there's one set of boundaries that the Supreme Court 
has dealt with.  We have leaders of other political parties who say go with 
the Archer Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that decision will be made in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary question to the Deputy 
Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, why don't you say what you really feel?  Why 



 

 

don't you say what you really mean?  You and your government are afraid to 
face the people, and that's not a good enough reason.  Just tell them that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- As I've said, we have an agenda laid out.  We've had a 
plan laid out by the Minister of Finance.  The hon. member opposite doesn't 
agree with that plan.  The hon. member opposite doesn't agree with the 
plan.  He doesn't agree with the financial plan for the province laid out 
by the Minister of Finance; he's made it very clear.  He's given no 
alternatives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I invite the hon. member once again, before the public of Saskatchewan 
finally votes -- before they vote, before the public of Saskatchewan votes 
-- that hon. member and all of his members over there will have to put 
before the public their plan for this province. 
 
And their plan has not been . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Public Servants' Demonstration 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: --  Mr. Speaker, my question . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I realize it's Friday morning, and 
perhaps a great many hon. members wish to get into question period.  
However, it's not possible.  You'll simply have to wait your turn.  And let 
us allow the member for Regina North East . . .  The member for Regina 
Lakeview and the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, plus one or two others 
-- plus one or two others, plus one or two others -- allow question period 
to proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is directed to the 
Deputy Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, last night we witnessed another 
example of your government's arrogance and bunker mentality. 
 
You and your colleagues, Mr. Deputy Premier, hide in this building.  You 
play games with the lives of families in this province, but you haven't got 
the courage to face public servants and their families who come to this 
building to talk to you about their concerns.  You lock the doors.  Your 
so-called decentralization, Mr. Minister, has become a disintegration of 
public services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- My question, Mr. Minister, is this:  if you are 
convinced that this is the right thing to do, why haven't you got the 
courage to face your critics and explain this disintegration which you are 



 

 

about, Mr. Minister?  Why haven't you got the courage to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, once again that member from Regina North 
East -- and I want to make this absolutely clear, Mr. Speaker -- that 
member last night in this House made the accusation that it was members of 
the government and the government that had anything to do with whatever 
security precautions were taken last night.  That's what he said last night 
and he says it again today, Mr. Speaker.  It's absolutely not the case.  
And the member . . . more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the member knows it 
full well.  The member knows full well that that's not the case. 
 
Security for this building, as you know, Mr. Speaker, and as every member 
of this House on either side knows, is the responsibility of the Office of 
the Speaker through the Sergeant-at-Arms.  The hon. member knows that full 
well.  All hon. members in this House on both sides have a responsibility 
as well.  They have a responsibility as well to support the Speaker and 
this legislature and the staff and the Sergeant-at-Arms and the 
Sergeant-at-Arms' staff.  All members have a responsibility to support 
that. 
 
That hon. member who just asked a question could have made a decision last 
night that it would have been a responsible one, to bring calm to a 
circumstance that was somewhat out of control.  He could have taken that 
decision as a responsible hon. member.  But did he take that decision?  No, 
Mr. Speaker, he took the decision that was based on pure politics of the 
NDP (New Democratic Party).  No responsibility to this House or to your 
office.  Mr. Speaker, that hon. member . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  The 
first and foremost responsibility of any government is to listen to the 
people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And an equal responsibility of any government is not to 
be afraid of them and run and hide when they want to talk to you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The Premier is being quoted by the media as saying that 
he is now looking at hiding from the voters until this fall.  You have 
locked the people out of their Legislative Building last night because you 
won't face up to them and explain the programs that you are announcing 
which will affect them and all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you this question: why have you shut the door of the 



 

 

legislature to some people like these that were here last night?  Why are 
you afraid of them?  Why have you shut the door to open government?  Will 
you stop this kind of arrogance, Mr. Minister, and will you open the 
government up as you committed you would when you introduced the 
legislation on freedom of information and other things earlier this year.  
Or was that just another false promise to try to get you to buy an 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the policies of this government are for 
the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  The member for Regina Centre, 
order.  Order, order, order.  And for Regina South.  Order please. 
 
Order!  I'm going to ask you again.  I'm going to ask hon. members again.  
I'm going to ask hon. members again. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the policies and the responsibility of the 
government is to the people of the whole province.  The policies that we 
have for stabilizing rural Saskatchewan are fundamental to the stability of 
that economy in rural Saskatchewan.  And we've said that here before and 
the hon. member knows that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question here is . . . and in another question again, the 
hon. member who knows full well that it is not the government, it is not 
the government who is responsible for security at the door of this 
building. 
 
The hon. member, as a member and a long-serving member of this legislature, 
had a choice to make.  And last night he chose . . . And I say to that hon. 
member he knows not only was he a part of it by opening the doors, that 
hon. member knows, he knows who was responsible for injuring the lady 
security guard in this building.  He knows who was responsible for those 
injuries.  That member knows that, Mr. Speaker.  And I say it very clearly 
in the House for all to see.  That member from Regina North East was there 
in the midst of the pack with several of his other members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the fact of life on that case.  They can say all they 
want for politics.  But, Mr. Speaker, the facts are your office through the 
Sergeant-at-Arms and the staff that all members here have a responsibility 
to support . . . We're responsible for what happened in the way of security 
last night. 
 
But that hon. member knows who was responsible for injuring that lady who's 
on your staff, Mr. Speaker, and he should be telling the public and telling 
you about it, telling somebody in authority about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker, who once 
again tries to overdramatize for simple, cheap, political purposes to try 



 

 

to save his hide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order.  Order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 
demonstrators who were here yesterday are people that you hired to work for 
you and work for the people of Saskatchewan and many of their supporters. 
 
These are not wild-eyed radicals.  They are working men and women.  They 
are raising their children and their families.  They work hard and they pay 
their taxes like you or I or anybody else, Mr. Minister.  And you haven't 
even got the courage to face your own employees and explain your program to 
them. 
 
Instead, Mr. Minister, you make political decisions.  You break up families 
or throw them into economic ruin, and you haven't got the guts to face them 
and tell them about what you're doing. 
 
 DI ask you, Mr. Minister: aren't you ashamed of your behaviour, and is 
there nothing that you won't stoop to because of your political 
desperation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, it's very clear.   The hon. member, there 
are two issues here, and the one issue in terms of the government policy 
and so on, and I've answered those questions before. 
 
The issue here is what I've said to that hon. member.  I've accused him 
directly and I accuse him again, because he does know.  He was there and he 
knows who was responsible for the injury to that lady last night.  He 
knows.  That hon. member knows, a member of this legislature, knows that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's no right of free speech, that the hon. member is very 
sanctimonious in drawing to the attention of the House . . . No right of 
free speech gives anyone the right to injure another.  That hon. member was 
right there in the midst of it.  He was right there in the midst with 
several of his colleagues, and they're sitting here today with their heads 
bowed, and they should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the acts of that member, the Deputy Leader of the NDP, who had 
a decision to make . . .  He could have brought some calm to the situation 
because of his stature.  He could have brought some calm to the situation.  
But did he do that, Mr. Speaker?  No.  He chose to do the exact opposite 
and incite those people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of the Family.  
Last night hundreds of men and women and their children were outside on the 



 

 

steps of this legislature, protesting the government's attitudes towards 
families in this province.  Last night the Minister of the Family didn't 
have the courage to go out and meet with those families.  The Minister of 
the Family is doing everything he can to support the Deputy Premier in his 
allegations about some woman that was hurt. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister of the Family, I ask you . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order!  Was your question 
complete? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- I ask you, Mr. Minister of the Family: what about the 
hundreds of families that were outside last night on the steps of this 
legislature?  What about the women and children that were outside on the 
steps of the legislature, and you refused, as the Minister of the Family, 
to go out and talk to those families, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order. 
 
All sides of the House please come to order.  I want some order in here.  I 
know it's difficult.  I know it's emotional.  Members on both sides of the 
House are emotional about the issue under discussion; however, as I said 
last night, it's still imperative that we respect each other and I say it 
again.  And now let us recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
And I don't know who's hollering over there on the opposition benches as 
I'm talking, but the very thing I'm talking is showing some respect; he's 
demonstrating he's not doing.  Now let us work together and allow the 
Deputy Premier to answer this question. 
 
I'm going to ask the Member for Humboldt to refrain from interfering. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the policy of the government -- I've said 
on several occasions before as it relates to Fair Share and stabilizing a 
very difficult economy across this province -- deals with families in all 
parts of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the hon. member refers to families in Regina, families of public 
servants of the Government of Saskatchewan, who are feeling significant 
consternation because of this policy of decentralization.  I'm aware of 
that and I know it, and I feel badly about it.  There's no question that 
that's true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but public policy for the whole province and for the stability 
of the economy across this province is very important to the province.  We 
take that responsibility seriously, and we're exercising that 
responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Advance Notice of Decentralization Plans 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- My question is to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  The 



 

 

people who appeared outside last night worked for the Department of 
Agriculture.  They worked for the Liquor Board.  They worked for many 
government departments that feared for the havoc you've wreaked over their 
lives over the past couple of weeks.  That's what was happening last night.  
But we find that there's fair share that's fairer for some than others, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
It appears that there's a quote in the Leader-Post story today of a person 
who was talking about the movement to Gravelbourg of the minority languages 
office.  He noted that Archambault, who is married to Chantal Devine's 
sister, had already sold his house in Regina and made plans to move back 
into his former home in Gravelbourg. 
 
How is it, Mr. Minister, that some people who are friends of your 
government get couple months notice, and others find out through news 
releases that they have to have their lives destroyed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- No, Mr. Speaker.  There was no advance notice for any 
employee in those departments with one exception, with one exception, Mr. 
Speaker . . . and that was where there was a leak of the information that 
took place in the case of the Department of Agriculture, the first 
announcement of Fair Share.  That's the case, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. 
member, the muck-raker from North Battleford, can make any allegations he 
wants to, but that is absolutely not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- To the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that the 
minister will want to review his comment that he made just now.  Mr. 
Archambault himself, he says:  But Archambault angrily denied the 
accusation of the two months notice that he got, explaining he only found 
out about the move to Gravelbourg last week.  Mr. Minister, that's advance 
notice. 
 
You'd also like people to believe that the provincial goods and services 
tax will create jobs and that GigaText was a solid investment for people in 
the province of Saskatchewan and like them to believe that you could 
balance the budget, Mr. Minister.  That's what you'd like people to 
believe. 
 
Can you tell us that in fact you give special treatment to some people that 
you want, that are your friends; and others, you want to destroy their 
lives. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I stand by what I said earlier: no advance 
notice to employees in the various departments.  The only people who knew 
were the senior manager in each case -- the senior manager, the deputy, the 
president, whatever was the case -- who would know in advance because we 
were working with them in terms of the configuration of the department when 
it was moved. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, who makes all of his allegations and his role 
in that caucus is obvious to all of us and to everybody, is always to be he 
who makes allegations, he who stands and rakes through the mud.  That's the 
nature of his role in the caucus; fair ball, I guess that's his role.  And 
he's accepted it willingly. 
 
That's the same member that goes to his own chamber of commerce in his own 
city of North Battleford and gives them a warning, Mr. Speaker, a warning 
to his chamber of commerce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Everybody in this 
province today knows that you locked the doors to some people, but you open 
the doors to the brother-in-law of the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, at one point there was decentralization in 
Saskatchewan -- Sask Forest products in Prince Albert, Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan up in La Ronge, the dental program and Highways 
workers all across the province. 
 
Will you tell us today, Mr. Minister, that you'll stop your 
decentralization plans as a political gimmick, call an election, let the 
people decide, and then we'll talk about decentralization in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the same hon. member made a request to my 
office in a phone call to an office staff member of my office about what's 
coming to North Battleford -- that hon. member.  Mr. Speaker, so all I'll . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.  Order, order.  Order, 
order, order, order, order.  Order. 
 
I'm going to have to ask the hon. member to apologize for that very direct 
accusation of lying which he just made. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I certainly withdraw that comment, and I apologize for 
using unparliamentary language, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'd like to ask the hon. member to conclude his remarks and 
end our question period. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks about an election.  
Mr. Speaker, there will be an election, I said in an earlier answer.  There 
is a plan laid out very clearly by members of this side of the House.  
There is no plan laid out by those hon. members, their leader, or anyone 
else. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, when there's an election, the people will choose based on good 
planning.  And we have done that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New Executive Co-ordinator of Corporate Environmental Management 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, just a 
few months ago I announced the establishment of a new post.  That post was 
unique in Canada.  It was called the executive co-ordinator of 
environmental business development.  Our objective with that is to identify 
opportunities for Saskatchewan businesses, to provide new environmental 
services . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Order.  Let us all listen to 
the ministerial statement of the Minister of the Environment.  And that 
includes the member from Saskatoon Nutana; I ask her also to pay attention.  
And the members will also have an opportunity to respond at least to the 
representative from the opposition.  And let us now perhaps tone down the 
emotions a bit and carry on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am today pleased 
to announce another new and important post within the Department of the 
Environment and Public Safety.  And I'd like to announce at this time the 
new executive co-ordinator of corporate environmental management will be 
Mr. Don Somers, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and introduced a few 
moments ago. 
 
Mr. Somers' job will be to work with senior corporate executives to develop 
environmental activities within their businesses and industries from the 
executive level on down.  He will be working out of the city of Saskatoon, 
out of the offices of the Environment and Public Safety in the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Business and industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I think are ready today 
to take very much a leadership role in protection of the environment.  And 
when we say that the healthy environment is everyone's responsibility, we 
don't just mean individuals, Mr. Speaker, we mean businesses, corporate 
structures as well.  Business and industry in Saskatchewan, I think, are 
ready to take a leadership role in many respects, have in the past, and 
will continue in the future. 
 
Just a brief outline of the program, Mr. Speaker.  The program will review 
current and projected environmental regulations, and together working with 
industry, develop a broad policy of corporate responsibility and action 
development.  We will also see the government and Crown corporations also 
play a leadership role . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Excuse me for interrupting, but I'm going to 
ask the hon. member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster to allow the Minister of 
Environment to continue.  And perhaps if we ceased debates across the floor 



 

 

and listen to the hon. member who happens to have the floor at the time, 
the House will run a bit more smoothly. 
 
And I ask the hon. member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster to do that and the 
hon. member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was saying, there will 
also be development of a prototype program for corporate involvement in 
environmental management.  You will also see government and Crown 
corporations take this same leadership role. 
 
To briefly give you a summation of Mr. Somers' experience, Mr. Somers has 
been involved in environmental and biotechnology consulting with the 
international accounting firm of Peat Marwick Stevenson and Kellogg.  He 
was also a senior executive with a Saskatchewan mining company involved in 
the environmental impact of mining. 
 
Mr. Somers is a former university faculty member.  He has taught, conducted 
research, and published in the field of molecular biology and genetics.  He 
is founder of the awareness science and technology education program, a 
Saskatoon-based program involving school boards, university researchers and 
business.  Mr. Somers was recently one of the three commissioners with the 
Saskatchewan Environmental Assessment Review Commission, and he has also 
sat on the Key Lake uranium board of inquiry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that Mr. Somers will serve very well in this 
capacity, and it's my pleasure to make that announcement this morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I just 
want to respond by saying that we extend our congratulations to Mr. Somers 
on his appointment.  We wish him well. 
 
In many ways this move is a step in the right direction.  But I want to 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that it takes more than simply the minister saying 
that this is going to happen.  I urge the minister to pay attention to 
recommendations that may come forward, because one of the greatest 
shortcomings in recent years -- in the last nine years of this government 
-- has been where the government has had a double standard in environmental 
policy. 
 
It has had one standard in environmental regulations and policy for 
everybody else; it has had another standard when it came to political 
projects that the government wanted to put into place.  And it did not 
apply the some kind of stringent environmental regulations and policing and 
requirements as it has on everybody else. 
 
I hope that this is the beginning, Mr. Speaker, of a change to all that.  
And we will be watching it at least for the next six months until the 
electorate has made a decision on which way this province is going to go on 
environmental matters. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 23 -- An Act respecting the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move 
first reading of a Bill respecting the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
(1045) 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Before orders of the day, I want to rise on a point of 
personal privilege before this legislature.  Earlier today I used 
unparliamentary language in this legislature and I apologize for that.  And 
I did that because I was very angry, Mr. Speaker, at a comment made by the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
The Deputy Premier, as close as I can tell, and I've asked you to review 
the record, pointed across at myself and said: that member phoned my office 
and asked what was coming to North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents watch this Assembly proceedings, 
especially during question period.  The provincial media take almost all of 
their newscasting from this question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my solemn oath as a member of this Legislative Assembly, 
that is totally, totally inaccurate, fabricated, and false; made either in 
error, either in error, Mr. Speaker, or intentionally by the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
I would ask that you find the question of privilege, because there will be 
no evidence that can be presented by the Deputy Premier that there is one 
iota of truth to the statement he made. 
 
I have not called his office in one instance to ask what would be coming to 
North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, nor have my staff called the minister's 
office and asked what was coming to North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am so angered by what the Deputy Premier would do to not only bring 
disrespect on this Assembly but to try and bring disrespect on me as a 
member of the legislature.  And it certainly affects in the eyes of my 
constituents, my integrity. 
 
And I ask you, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to examine the record and find that 
my privileges as a member of this Chamber have been violated by the Deputy 
Premier.  Thank you, sir. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I have listened to the hon. member's point of 
privilege which pertains directly to him and I'm prepared . . . Order, 
order. 
 
Actually in this particular case I don't know if it's really necessary to 
hear anybody else because it's the individual himself complaining that 
something's happened to him.  If you wish to make a brief comment, I will 
listen to it, but on this particular issue quite frankly I don't intend to 
hear a large number or even a smaller number of members speak.  It is 
something that is directly pertaining to him. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your ruling to allow me to 
speak and I will be very brief. 
 
But during question period, the Deputy Premier I believe made disparaging 
remarks about one of our members in an attempt to discredit the member in a 
very substantial issue that he was raising at the time. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm going to have ask the hon. member 
for Quill Lakes and I believe it was Cut Knife-Lloydminster again, but I'm 
not sure -- and if it isn't I apologize to him -- but one of the members on 
the opposite side.  And the hon. member for Quill Lakes, I'm going to ask 
him to refrain and allow his own colleague to speak. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 
opportunity to get up just for a short moment to defend the member from The 
Battlefords. 
 
During question period the Deputy Premier indicated, and I think in an 
attempt to discredit the member because he was asking tough questions about 
the relocation of the Premier's brother-in-law from Regina to Gravelbourg . 
. . My comment here, Mr. Speaker, is based on what I believe are the rules 
of the Assembly that indicate that reflections on members, as indicated on 
page 19 of Beauchesne's Rules and Forms, clause no. 64, under "Reflections 
on Members," indicate that: 
 

 The House has occasionally taken notice of attacks on individual Members. 
 

And it goes on to explain how, if remarks or attacks are made on one member 
to another, that the remarks are either substantiated or withdrawn.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you would today ask that the member from the 
Meadow Lake would withdraw the comments he made about a member on our side 
of the House. 
 
On another point, Mr. Speaker, the words were used by the minister against 
the member from The Battlefords, using the term "muck-raker," and I would 
just ask whether or not that is parliamentary language from the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- I have listened to the hon. member's point of privilege and 
would like to respond to it in this manner, by drawing the attention of 
hon. members to Beauchesne's, 5th Edition.  You will find under citation 
19, page 12, 19(1): 
 

 A dispute arising between two Members, as to allegations of facts . . . 
 

Order, order, order, order.  Now the member for Regina Lakeview, I realize 
that she has an interest in this, as many other people, and the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Now here is Beauchesne's, a time-honoured rules.  The member for Regina 
Elphinstone, just allow the ruling to go forth. 
 
Now whether hon. members agree with it or don't agree with it -- Order! -- 
that is another matter.  However, this is the ruling as I see it. 
 
Now citation 19, page 12, Beauchesne's, 5th edition once more: 
 

 (1) A dispute arising between two 
Members, as to allegations of facts, does not fulfill the conditions 
of parliamentary privilege. 

 
Now let me draw your attention also to citation 322, headed by "Statements 
by Members:" 
 

 It has been formally ruled by Speakers that a statement by a Member 
respecting himself and particularly within his own knowledge must be 
accepted, but it is not unparliamentary temperately to criticize 
statements made by a member as being contrary to the facts; but no 
imputation of intentional falsehood is permissible.  On rare occasions 
this may result in the House having to accept two contradictory accounts 
of the same incident. 

 
Therefore, based on those two citations, I find that the hon. member has 
not established a prima facie case of privilege. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the speed with which that ruling came 
forth is contrasted with what I gather is your failure to deliver your 
ruling and your response with respect to the document you quoted from the 
other night.  We contrast the speed with which the two have been  
 Ddealt with. 
 
I want to ask you as well, Mr. Speaker, since I guess you're not going to 
respond today . . . As Mr. Speaker will know, members on this side of the 
House have the gravest concern about the fashion in which the incident last 
night was handled.  We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the government is 
overdramatizing and exaggerating the situation for their own use, for their 
own narrow political benefit. 
 
A group of peaceful protesters came to present some views and you would 



 

 

think this was 1789 and the storming of bastille.  That was the way the 
government reacted last night. 
 
If the staff . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order!  Order, order, 
order.  Order, order!  Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  Now 
just a minute, just a minute.  Just a minute.  You people hold it, hold it.  
Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Now I believe that the demonstration I'm seeing here -- just terrible.  Now 
I got up, I got up . . . Order.  I rose to my feet because I heard the 
statement and I was going to draw it to the attention of the hon. member.  
Now if you people would just stop interfering, I will be able to do that.  
And that was exactly my intention.  And you're being most unfair, most, 
most unfair and unparliamentary by doing that. 
 
Now the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster made a statement, that there is 
the wife-beater.  And that's unparliamentary.  I must ask him to rise and 
apologize for that remark. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, I will apologize. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  It isn't funny.  The member 
for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, I'd like to . . . It isn't funny at all.  It 
isn't funny at all.  And I'd like to draw that to his attention, and I 
think that he should act in a parliamentary manner after apologizing.  It 
isn't funny at all. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I said, a peaceful group of 
demonstrators came and I think the government entirely over-reacted.  And 
if there is a rule of the Assembly which actually authorizes the locking of 
this Chamber, I and my colleagues want to be very clear about it. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the point of my rising in the first place, before I 
was apparently accused of being a wife-beater . . . I'm not sure many of my 
constituents would believe that and I'm not particularly concerned about 
it.  Apart from its rather unparliamentary approach, I don't think it'll be 
widely believed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you are returning with your . . . with the copy of the 
security document, if there's some explanation for not having it today, I'd 
be interested in that.  I'd also like to know the authority for the use of 
that document.  If Mr. Speaker intends to refer to the committee of 
expenditures, the Board of Internal Economy, I would like to have the 
minute number and the date of the minute which authorizes that.  Because 
frankly to be fair, the two members who sat on that between '82 and '86 are 
no longer a part of our caucus.  It is possible. 
 
But we vehemently disagree with that treatment of the public. And we want 
to be very sure that the rules of this Assembly authorize that sort of 
treatment, because we think it is entirely inconsistent with everything 
this Legislative Assembly stands for. 



 

 

 
(1100) 
 
The Speaker: -- I listened to the hon. member's remarks, and I listened to 
them and I know he puts them forth with concern and sincerity. 
 
I don't have the ruling for you this morning for a very good reason.  I 
wanted to do the total research and I will provide you with all the answers 
that it is possible for me to provide to you.  You may be assured of that.  
Whatever information we have, you will get. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Time Allocation on Bill 61 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to move a motion 
this morning respecting the remaining time that this Assembly will deal 
with Bill no. 61.  The motion that I will be moving is seconded by my seat 
mate, the member for Regina South. 
 
And in effect what this motion will do amongst other things is to extend a 
normal Friday sitting day.  We'll probably be here past the 1 o'clock 
normal time of adjournment and we will spend I believe it's four hours on . 
. . or up to four hours, not necessarily the full four hours, but up to 
four hours on Committee of the Whole. 
 
In reviewing this Bill I have taken note that there are six rather 
straightforward sections to the Bill.  I freely admit that the issue and 
the principle here is a big one that has been debated at length in the 
Assembly in one form or another. 
 
The issue is a big one; it's not, however, complex.  It's not a complex 
piece of legislation.  It's rather straightforward.  And as such, I'd like 
to move, seconded by my seat mate: 
 

 That notwithstanding the rules of this Assembly, and following the 
adoption of this motion, when the order is called for Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 
(No. 2), not more than four hours shall be allocated to debate on such 
order and that at 15 minutes before the expiration of the allocated time, 
unless sooner concluded, the Chairman shall put all questions necessary to 
dispose of every section of the Bill not yet passed, and shall report the 
Bill forthwith to the House, and that the question for the first and 
second reading of any amendments shall be put forthwith and decided 
without amendment or debate; and, 

 
 That there shall be one hour allocated to the consideration of the motion 

for third reading of Bill No. 61, and at 15 minutes before the expiration 
of the allocated time, unless sooner concluded, the Speaker shall 
interrupt proceedings and put every question necessary to dispose of the 
order for third reading of the Bill; and, 



 

 

 
 That in the case of any recorded division relating to any proceeding on 

the Bill, the bells shall be limited to 10 minutes; and, 
 
 That rule 3(3) be suspended on the sitting day in which proceedings on 

Bill No. 61 pursuant to this motion begin. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that's a brief summation of what this motion would do and I 
would trust that the Assembly would deal with this in an expeditious 
manner. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm afraid I have to interrupt you 
immediately.  The member for Regina Victoria I see is on his feet. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 
introduce to you Ling Ling Fan and Xihe Zhao.  These are new Canadians -- 
scholars, engineers, who have moved here from Beijing.  They are 
accompanied by Betty Lewis who is helping them to learn the English 
language.  And I would ask all members to join with me to wish them a very 
warm welcome, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Time Allocation on Bill 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What we have witnessed over 
the last few months, but particularly over the last few weeks and days, is 
a government which is increasingly reluctant to discuss any subject with 
which people disagree with them.  They're increasingly reluctant to permit 
a full debate on this Bill.  And I'm going to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, 
in a while, to talk about the magnitude of this Bill and what this sort of 
thing represents.  It's a government which is increasingly reluctant to 
listen to the public. 
 
I am not, Mr. Speaker, going to again make my comments with respect to what 
occurred last night.  I won't go through that again, but neither has the 
government heard the last of it.  Mr. Speaker, it is our view that the 
government exists to serve the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The government of this province does not exist to serve 
Cargill, it not does exist to serve the friends of the Conservative Party, 



 

 

it does not even, Mr. Speaker, exist to serve the Conservative Party. It 
exists to serve the public.  When the public want to make themselves heard 
on a government issue, they have every right and responsibility to do so. 
 
The fashion in which this government has begun to close the doors of 
government to the public is truly breath-taking.  Mr. Speaker, I recall in 
the '70s a number of different groups -- the natives, Indian and Metis were 
one group; the oil men were another group who demonstrated and came in.  I 
remember when the natives were here, there were literally thousands of them 
outside.  They brought in their war drums, the big drums; they weren't war 
drums, the big drums.  And what did they want?  They wanted to speak to the 
premier.  And they stayed there, and they were welcome to come.  And 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, they met with the premier.  And when they met with the 
premier, they left. 
 
What the public want is an opportunity to address themselves to the 
government, and that's what they're being denied.  That's what they're 
being denied with closure and that's what they're being denied with the 
pathetic displays . . . with the pathetic behaviour which took place last 
night.  That's all they wanted. 
 
The style of your government, the style of this government would embarrass 
a military dictatorship in South America, much less a North American 
government.  In catcalls earlier to the member from Regina South, I said to 
him, where do you think you are?  Is this North America or South America?  
This is a democracy.  People have the right to come, they have a right to 
address themselves, and they have a right to speak to their leaders.  And 
they have done that since time immemorial. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- It is the legacy of English and French notions of 
democracy which we have inherited.  They have a right to come here and 
speak to their government.  They have a right to do that directly, and they 
have a right to do that indirectly. 
 
And this government isn't giving them the right in either way.  You aren't 
allowing the members to speak to it, and you won't listen to them directly.  
And what do you think you're going to face, apart from . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I delight . . . I have accomplished something.  
Mr. Speaker, the day has not been totally wasted; I have accomplished 
something.  Apparently we're going to get some members opposite into the 
debate, which we have not been very successful in doing so far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that the best way to resolve disputes is to throw 
open discussion until the matter has been resolved.  We believe . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 
 
Now perhaps hon. members feel strongly about certain issues. However I 
don't think that gives them the right to disrupt proceedings in the House.  
It doesn't give them that right.  Now I have asked the hon. members this 
morning several times to control themselves, to refrain from disrupting the 



 

 

proceedings of the House.  Regardless of how strongly you feel, I think 
there are times that you must just simply learn to control your feelings, 
as it were. 
 
And let us allow the member for Regina Centre to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is our view, Mr. Speaker, 
that the best way to resolve legitimate disputes between people in a 
democracy is to permit the discussion to continue until there is some 
measure of agreement. And that is the way these matters are resolved. 
 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, and I've said this before, when the potash 
industry was nationalized.  The largest nationalization in human history 
took place in this province.  It was enormously controversial.  Mr. 
Speaker, the debate on the Bill continued non-stop from early in December 
to early in February -- non-stop. Nothing else was discussed. 
 
And eventually the discussion came to an end.  And, I may say, eventually 
there was a measure of agreement as to what ought to be done.  And the 
issue was not an issue thereafter.  There was a measure of agreement.  But 
it continued, as I recall it, for seven weeks. 
 
What's the hurry to deal with the tax Bill?  It's this government's 
political agenda.  This government is putting its election timetable ahead 
of the public business.  And we object, and we object in the strongest 
possible terms. 
 
I'm going to be interested to hear the comments of members opposite.  We 
witnessed a spectacle this morning, of members making the most derogatory, 
might I say obscene, comments from their seat.  Then they're asked a 
question and they won't get up and respond to it.  We witnessed that this 
morning. 
 
I'm going to be interested to see whether or not the member from Wascana 
takes the opportunity to make his comments on this subject, very closely 
related.  I'm going to be very interested to see whether or not the member 
from Weyburn takes the opportunity to put his comments on the record 
instead of making them from his seat. 
 
I shall be very interested to hear the member's view of how a democracy 
functions because we don't think it functions in this fashion.  We believe 
the public have a right to be heard. They have a right to be heard in this 
Assembly and they have a right to be heard outside the Assembly.  And when 
members opposite take steps to limit discussion on issues, then you are 
doing almost irreparable harm to the public good in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- What took place last night, Mr. Speaker, was a peaceful 
demonstration, largely of women and children since they are the ones who 
are affected by the disintegration.  There was largely women and children 



 

 

here last night. 
 
If there was excessive frustration on the part of that demonstration, it 
came about because nobody would talk to them.  Nobody from government would 
walk outside the door and face the music. 
 
Members opposite are fond of quoting Allan Blakeney.  Why I've heard his 
name a dozen times in the last few days.  Well let me tell you one of the 
rules when I was in Allan Blakeney's cabinet.  Nobody ever ducked a 
demonstration.  You didn't do it. 
 
I recall having gone and spoken to some very angry crowds, but nobody 
ducked it.  It wasn't done.  I spoke to trade unionists about wage and 
price controls -- anyone thinks that was a piece of cake you should have 
been there.  I spoke to gay rights people when we didn't support their 
view, when the government did not support their view. 
 
All of those groups were met.  And so were the demonstrators who came 
inside the building.  They had their day.  And when they had their day, 
they left. And indeed with respect to the natives, I just might add the 
sequel to the story was that that was the beginning of the process whereby 
we began to settle Indian land claims. 
 
What was, Mr. Speaker, what was in a sense heart-warming about the natives 
who were in the building was they believed in the system.  They come in 
with one request.  They wanted to meet the Premier.  And they believed when 
they met the Premier the problems would be resolved.  They believed in the 
institution; they believed in the leaders who were there. 
 
(1115) 
 
And that is of the most fundamental importance.  What happened last night, 
and it is symptomatic of the sickness of this government, and there's no 
kinder language for it than sickness -- symptomatic of the sickness of this 
government, is that nobody would talk to them, and that left them with the 
impression that nobody was ever going to listen.  And if there was some 
frustration, it was bred by the government's behaviour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same problem repeats itself with respect to closure on 
this Bill.  This is a Bill of the most fundamental importance.  It goes to 
the manner in which this government manages its affairs.  And the 
management of this government's affairs has been truly dreadful.  Look what 
nine years of fiscal management by this government has brought us. 
 
I had two rather interesting pieces of mail from this week, Mr. Speaker.  
One was something that I had not forgotten about but I've lost my copy of 
it.  The member from Moosomin might be interested in the name.  I ran into 
John Porter, lives in a small community, Kelso. 
 
He happened to have his copy of it.  What is it?  The clipping from The New 
York Times in which Saskatchewan, 1981, in which Saskatchewan was described 
as the best managed jurisdiction in North America.  It was 1981, 
Saskatchewan had a reputation in the largest daily newspaper on the planet, 



 

 

the largest daily newspaper on the planet, The New York Times, had the 
reputation of being the best managed jurisdiction in North America.  I'd 
read it and I frankly lost my copy.  I ran into somebody who'd saved it. 
 
What's happened after nine years?  Well I want to read -- and I don't often 
do this -- I want to read a letter which I got from my brother living in 
Manitoba.  It illustrates what has happened to this province over nine 
years. 
 
He writes -- and we'll skip the preceding paragraphs -- he says also on 
trivia: I hear Saskatchewan mentioned in an interesting context in 
Winnipeg, where presently a full-scale civic debate is going on over the 
possible construction of a new $60 million arena.  It is generally conceded 
that if a new larger glitzier arena is not constructed, the Winnipeg Jets 
will have to be sold, in the face of escalating player salaries. 
 
One city councillor remarked this week -- and this is the point of this 
paragraph -- that if it was not built, Winnipeg would become another 
Regina.  My Heavens above! Winnipeg is going to become another Regina, a 
prospect that apparently strikes cold terror into the hearts of any 
Winnipeger.  Indeed, he goes on, today's Sunday Free Press headlined on the 
front page, build Manitoba gardens or we'll just be another Saskatchewan. 
 
That's our reputation after nine years.  In 1981 we were the best managed 
jurisdiction in North America.  In 1991 people fear that they will turn out 
like us.  That is what nine years of Conservative government have meant.  
That's what your style of management have meant. 
 
And you want to choke off debate on the central issue of this session. It 
is an issue which goes to the very core of your style of management.  We 
have said to you that you have plenty of revenue to provide the services 
which you need.  I said before, I'm going to say today, and I'm going to go 
on saying, that in the nine years from April 1982 to April 1991, in those 
nine years, inflation has gone up by 48 per cent but your revenues have 
gone up by 61 per cent. 
 
The fiscal problems of this government have nothing to do with not having 
enough revenue.  You've got more than enough revenue to provide the 
services you need.  You have problems because, while your revenue's gone up 
by 61 per cent, your expenditures have gone up by 85 per cent.  We say, Mr. 
Speaker, the problems which this government has has everything to do with 
waste and nothing to do with revenue.  You've got lots of money to provide 
the services they need.  And that, Mr. Speaker, has become in a way the 
central issue in the political landscape today. 
 
Wherever you go you hear people talking about this issue in different ways.  
They may call it waste and mismanagement.  They may complain about the 
former member from Kindersley, now ensconced in I gather rather posh 
offices in Minneapolis doing I don't know what.  They may talk about the 
member . . . the former member from Indian Head-Wolseley, Graham Taylor, 
ensconced I guess in some of the world's poshest offices overlooking the 
Hong Kong -- and some of the world's most expensive offices -- overlooking 
the Hong Kong bay. 



 

 

 
But when they're doing it, they're talking about the same general issue.  
It is the level of taxes and the level of expenditures.  And not a soul in 
this province believes that the money which comes into the public treasury 
is being spent efficiently or effectively.  Not a soul believes that.  Mr. 
Speaker, I sometimes believe that this government doesn't believe it and 
that's why they want to end this debate. 
 
From the very beginning of this debate, the government's sole objective has 
been to bring the debate to a close.  In early May, a month ago, this 
government introduced a motion. After three opposition members had spoken, 
on the largest tax increase in the history of the province, after three 
opposition members had spoken, they moved closure. 
 
There was a day, Mr. Speaker, prior to 1982, when not only were people 
allowed into the building, but when debate went on, closure was never used.  
Closure was never used up until 1982.  This was a society which believed in 
free and open discussion, and it was a hallmark of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity . . . Whenever I'm travelling I always 
stop and see the local provincial legislative buildings in the state 
capitals.  I always make time for it. 
 
I want to quickly relate a couple of very different experiences.  One was 
in Hawaii.  Their state capital in a sense reflects the people -- an open 
and free society.  There are no doors on the building.  It wouldn't work in 
Saskatchewan; we have a different climate.  But they have no doors on the 
building nor are there any security people.  The only way you can tell the 
Canadians from the local legislators is that we're wearing heavy, dark 
clothing and they're wearing white shirts.  But apart from that you mingle 
freely.  There were no security people.  And that is the way the Hawaiian 
society is structured. 
 
About three or four years ago -- three years ago to be precise -- my son 
and I were in Mexico City.  I had obtained from an employee who works for 
the member from Regina Rosemont, I had obtained the name of a deputy in 
Mexico City.  I asked them to call me. He didn't. So I thought I'd just 
jolly well trot down to the Legislative Assembly and look him up myself.  
So I did that. 
 
My son and I headed out one bright, sunny morning, went down to . . . Their 
legislative building in Mexico City is called the National Palace.  Went in 
with a stream of tourists into what I thought was the National Palace, but 
discovered there was one door for tourists and one door for deputies.  And 
I realized after I was in it, I was in the wrong spot.  So as soon as Ron 
and I could extricate ourselves, we got back out.  The door where the 
deputy was in was obvious enough. 
 
Neither my son or I spoke Spanish, any meaningful amount of Spanish, so we 
couldn't explain to the guard what we wanted.  The person at the door was 
not a Mexico City policeman. It was a soldier armed with a sub-machine-gun.  
When we started to come to the door, he went like that.  I gave him the 
biggest Canadian smile and kept on going because when I got there I had the 



 

 

name of the person I was going to see.  I took a couple of more steps.  His 
machine-gun came down.  I heard the distinctive click of a safety coming 
off, and we were looking at the business end of a machine gun.  We slowly 
backed up and we walked quietly away from the door.  I gave up any attempt 
to see the deputy -- no longer a priority. 
 
As we were leaving, my son who was 10 years of age, asked me about it.  One 
of the questions he asked was: what were they afraid of?  I said, Ryan, I 
don't know; it's not the kind of society we live in.  I do not know what 
that soldier thought we were going to do inside the building. 
 
Well to some extent we are becoming that kind of a society.  To some extent 
we are moving from the Hawaiian model of a free and open democratic society 
to a society where government protects itself and the people through 
security.  We do not have soldiers with machine-guns at the front door of 
this building, but we have a group of people with the same mentality, and 
that is anybody who wants to argue with you is dangerous.  Anyone with a 
disparaging comment is a dangerous person and must be treated as such. 
 
There was a day in this province when we treated people as the Hawaiians 
do.  Everyone can be trusted, and it's your building, come on in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- There was a day, Mr. Speaker, when the debate in this 
Assembly was conducted in the same fashion.  It is the people's business; 
let them be heard.  The largest expropriation in the history of the 
province can wait on the discussion until the discussion brings itself to a 
conclusion.  Closure was never used in this Assembly up until 1982.  None 
of us . . . indeed there was an argument in our caucus by people who have 
been here a long time about whether or not closure existed.  We never 
thought of it.  It was never discussed. 
 
What do we have now?  We have a government which, after three speakers on 
the largest tax increase in the history of the province, moves closure.  
And then what happened?  We had to resort to the most extraordinary 
measures -- the introduction of petitions, thousands of them, 120,000 names 
to be more precise.  We had to resort to that measure to get the right to 
speak.  And to put it mildly, that process has not exhausted itself. 
 
We had three speakers speak beforehand, and some of us wanted to speak at 
length, for a longer period of time than many of the public would think 
perhaps is necessary.  I spoke for two and a half hours.  My colleague from 
Moose Jaw North spoke for about the same length of time.  We did so because 
we felt it was important.  We wanted to make the arguments on behalf of our 
constituents and on behalf of the people of this province. 
 
What happens after four days of debate on the largest tax increase in the 
history of this province?  The government moves closure again.  To put it 
mildly, we are upset with this. 
 
This government doesn't believe in listening; it doesn't believe in even 
allowing the public to speak.  It is one thing not to listen.  No one can 



 

 

make you do that.  But it is quite another thing for members opposite to 
deny the public the right to be heard.  And that's what you're doing. 
 
The incident which occurred last night and the closure on this debate are 
all part and parcel of the same attitude.  It's all part and parcel of the 
same attitude.  It is, Mr. Speaker, an attitude which says the public have 
no place in public business.  Well that isn't our point of view.  That 
isn't our point of view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Apparently, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are going 
to continue with this charade.  Apparently reason is not going to prevail.  
Members opposite have one thought in mind, and that is to get us out of 
their hair.  That's the way they view us. 
 
They view us as a nuisance, not as part of a great democratic institution 
which has been copied around the world as an institution which permits and 
ensures that governments will be accountable to the people.  And it is.  It 
is an institution which has been copied by white, black, north, south, 
east, west.  This institution -- almost carbon copies of this institution 
exist in every corner of the globe.  Some mighty nations, India, land of 
hundreds of millions of people, and some very small ones with 100,000 
people -- all have the same institution.  Why?  Because it has proved 
successful in ensuring that governments are accountable to the people and 
government do what the people want. 
 
What we have witnessed in this province over the last few years and in this 
country is a dangerous erosion of that accountability -- a dangerous 
erosion. 
 
The editors of the Maclean's magazine in their last edition -- each 
December they do an accounting of the nation -- they made I thought a very 
interesting comment in their last December's issue.  The December issue is 
done with a poll, and then there's a discussion of the poll of public 
opinion and then a discussion of what the poll meant. 
 
In the discussion of what the poll meant, the editors of Maclean's magazine 
describe the Canadians' attitudes toward their government as one of an 
elected dictatorship.  Canadians believe that you elect a government and 
then you have absolutely no control over it.  They do whatever they want as 
if they were a dictatorship. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a recent phenomenon.  And it has occurred because 
members opposite have adamantly refused to listen to the public.  But what 
is even more serious, they have refused to allow the public to be heard.  
The public have every right to hear each member of this caucus discuss it 
and discuss it for as long as they want.  They also, I hesitate to add, 
have every right to hear members opposite, government members, defend it. 
 
(1130) 
 
The public, for the taxes which these people pay . . . And I remind you, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, that Canada is one of the highest-taxed nations in the world, 
and we are the highest-taxed province in Canada.  So we can justly say that 
we are the highest-taxed province in one of the highest-taxed countries in 
the world. 
 
The taxes of that sort, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure today, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce to you a group of school grade 6 children from 
Humboldt, about 40 of them.  And they're in your gallery.  They're visiting 
Regina today and taking in the legislature as one of their activities. 
 
Their teachers are Jerry Kuntz and Janine Bauml, and chaperons Debbie Wiens 
and Beverly Yeager.  I will meet with the students in a few minutes for a 
chat and some refreshments, and I'd like all members to welcome them here 
and join with me in wishing they have a good stay in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Time Allocation on Bill 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I was saying, Mr. Speaker, that 
the people of this province, the highest-taxed province in one of the 
highest-taxed countries in the world, surely for those sort of taxes 
they're entitled to something more than what we witnessed this morning on 
this very topic. 
 
We witnessed the spectacle of the Minister of the Family making derogatory, 
and I'm going to say obscene, comments from his seat.  Then my colleague, 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana, asked him a question and gave him an 
opportunity to speak.  What happened?  As silent as a fence post.  He had 
nothing to say. 
 
Surely for the taxes which these people pay, they're entitled to something 
more than that.  Surely they're entitled to an explanation for what the 
government's doing.  You don't have to listen.  You don't have to listen, 
but you do have to explain what you're doing.  You are under an obligation 
to do something more than call the members of this side wife-beaters.  
They're entitled to some better explanation of why we have a goods and 
services tax than simply that you think we're wife-beaters.  Mr. Speaker, 
and members opposite, you owe them more than that.  And if you have any 
passing interest in where you are in the polls, you need look no further 
than your arrogance and your adamant refusal to listen to the public. 
 



 

 

Let's just do a little review of where we have been since 1986.  Where have 
we been?  You went through the 1986 election promising a deficit of some 
360 million.  Presto!  After the election it's $1.3 billion.  That still 
stands, Mr. Speaker, as an all-Canadian record as the highest deficit per 
capita in the history of the dominion.  That is a record which still 
stands, the Ontario budget notwithstanding.  That is the record. 
 
What was the minister of Finance's response when the reporters asked him:  
Little mistake in the arithmetic, Mr. Minister?  He said, with a smirk on 
his face, ah, we're politicians you know.  What do you expect people to 
think? 
 
What happened then?  Having gone through the election promising medicare 
was sacrosanct and would never be touched, you then proceeded to dismantle 
it.  You did away with the drug plan, and you did away with the children's 
dental program.  That was 1987. 
 
What happened in 1988?  What did you do in 1988 to restore public faith in 
these institutions?  Having gone through the election faithfully promising 
you would not privatize Saskatchewan Crowns, you proceeded to privatize the 
biggest one of them all, SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation).  Having 
faithfully promised 20 months earlier you wouldn't do it, you went ahead 
and do it.  What do you expect them to behave?  What do you expect them to 
think of you?  That was 1988. 
 
1989-1990, well perhaps you were just too distracted by one stupidity after 
another: GigaText, SED Systems, Supercart, Joytec.  The list goes on and on 
and on and on and on. 
 
What happens in 1991?  In the face of public opinion, which everyone agrees 
that waste and mismanagement is the overarching issue in the six months 
leading up to the February announcement of February 20, everyone agreed the 
overarching issue was waste and mismanagement.  And in the face of that 
kind of public opinion, what do you people do?  You introduce the largest 
tax increase in the history of the province.  How on earth do you expect 
the public to respond?  What arrogance.  What flat refusal to listen to 
public opinion.  What flouting of the taxpayers who sent you here.  What do 
you expect?  What do you expect? 
 
Not only did you not . . . not only did you introduce the largest tax 
increase in the history of the province, not only did you do that, but you 
did it outside the legislature in a fashion which is clearly illegitimate, 
clearly illegitimate to be introducing a budget outside the legislature, 
never intending to bring it to this legislature. 
 
To members opposite who accuse us of being governed by the polls, all I can 
say is the party which has postponed the election for four years and eight 
months, ought not to lecture anyone about being governed by the polls. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Four vacancies. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And four vacancies.  Because I would say the polls have 
something to do with your thinking as well.  Anyone who's delayed the 



 

 

election as long as you have cannot be entirely oblivious to the polls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the spectacle of a government introducing the largest 
tax increase in the history of the province and flouting public opinion in 
doing so -- the public who were saying waste and mismanagement is the issue 
with which the parties must deal.  And what did the government opposite do?  
You flout public opinion and you increase taxes instead -- the exact 
opposite of what they were telling you to do.  You did it outside the 
legislature. 
 
Then when you couldn't avoid a legislature -- and only because the 
boundaries were overthrown by the Court of Appeal -- what did you do?  You 
introduced a Bill in the legislature but you introduced closure three days 
later.  There's nothing new or different about the way you're behaving on 
this thing.  The only difference is that it's that much closer to the 
election. 
 
But this, Mr. Speaker, is part of a pattern of behaviour which has existed 
non-stop since 1986.  You have flouted public opinion on every issue which 
came before them.  And what do you expect people . . . how do you expect 
people to describe you as other than an elected dictatorship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has been oblivious to our arguments, the 
public opinion, for four years I guess, five years.  I don't entertain a 
lot of hope that I'm going to change them this afternoon.  I do make you 
one promise.  I gather, Mr. Speaker, that we're now looking at a November 
election.  I gather the Premier has announced that his legislative calendar 
is so stuffed, so stuffed that he cannot get around to an election before 
late fall.  I gather that's the announcement.  I haven't heard it, but the 
reporters told me that. 
 
I promise members opposite one thing.  Come November 1, if there is a 
change in administration, this building and this institution are going to 
be open to public opinion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- My colleague, the member from Saskatoon Eastview has 
done some excellent work on democratic reform.  And I can promise members 
opposite that that is going to be implemented so that once again this is 
the institution through which government is called to account by the 
people.  This institution is going to operate as it once operated so well. 
 
I make one other commitment as well.  That after November 1, Mr. Speaker, 
this building is going to go back to being a building which belongs to the 
people and they are going to have free access to it and it is . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- It will not be a fortress within which a tired and sick 
government hides from the public.  It will cease to be that.  It will cease 
to be that.  After November 1, if we do nothing else, we are going to bring 
the public back into public business and back into public buildings so that 



 

 

once again government will work in partnership with the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll just speak very briefly to 
this motion.  It may not have been apparently noticed by many, Mr. Speaker, 
but I have not spoken in this Assembly for quite a long time.  The last 
time I spoke, Mr. Speaker, I indicated my shame and my embarrassment for 
being part of this proud institution.  For that reason I have sat here in 
silence. 
 
You know this whole institution that was so special to me my entire life 
has been transformed into some kind of a spectacle by the members opposite, 
and I've simply . . . I used to consider them my colleagues.  I even got 
close enough, Mr. Speaker, to perhaps consider a couple of them my friends.  
But no more.  No longer can I make that statement. 
 
And it disturbs me greatly, Mr. Speaker, that my attitude is like that.  
But there are many instances that I will bring forward in my few moments to 
tell my people why.  Last week we all remember that they proudly invited 
their union leaders into this Assembly and put them in the galleries and 
proudly introduced these people. 
 
Member opposite says, so what.  Proudly introduced their friends and 
guests.  And yet we all remember very clearly the disturbance that those 
guests of yours created as they left this place.  And it was your fault 
because you brought them here and you incited them into that very thing.  
And it's you people that assume the responsibility of transforming this 
place into what you have done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite accuse us of not meeting with 
demonstrators or members of the public that may disagree with our policy.  
It's typical distortion.  I expect that from those members opposite as they 
sit there in their smug arrogance believing in their own selves that they 
will inherit government, and that's all they have to do.  Be silent; say 
nothing; have no policy; have no plan.  They will inherit government.  And 
they sit there so smugly and so arrogant.  They believe that they can 
destroy this institution and become that government. 
 
They still must account to the people.  And when that time comes, Mr. 
Speaker, I will proudly go to the people and tell them my colleagues are 
not afraid to meet with the public, as they claim in here, bordering 
fabricated stories, distortion and all the like. 
 
Very clearly on my own record, people will remember, again sparked by the 
members of the opposition, galleries full, the people of the Principal 
Trust affair.  That day made me meet with them as a result of question 
period rather than asking in a normal fashion to have a meeting with me.  I 
met with them, Mr. Speaker.  No problem. 
 
A couple of weeks ago, Barb Byers, who probably runs that outfit, came to 
this Assembly with a group from Hudson Bay.  I met with them, Mr. Speaker.  



 

 

We have no problem meeting with people of the public.  We never  
 Dhave and we never will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they said at the outset of this session that they were out to 
destroy and disrupt this Assembly.  And I congratulate them for that, 
because their record is clear and they have done that.  They simply don't 
have the right, Mr. Speaker, to discredit the Chair the way they do, the 
Assembly, and the parties the way they do time after time, and finding 
necessity to bring them to order regularly.  They don't have the right to 
say that they represent all of the people and expect people to believe 
that.  They don't have the right to say last night's peaceful demonstration 
was led by families and children.  Families and children don't injure 
security guards, particularly female security guards.  And when some of 
those people are mixed in with a crowd, they become an accomplice to that, 
Mr. Speaker.  And as a result of being an accomplice, they must have to 
bear the result that occurred last night. 
 
(1145) 
 
The Speaker: -- To be quite frank, some hon. members are bothered by the 
remarks of the member for Saskatoon South.  However, having said that, 
having said that . . . I'm sorry, yes it isn't Saskatoon South.  I 
apologize for that.  They are offended by the remarks of the member for 
Regina South. 
 
The debate started with the hon. member for Regina Centre who spent some 
time on the issue himself.  As everybody in this House heard, the member 
for Regina South is also spending some time on that issue.  Quite frankly, 
I don't think we should be spending that much time on this issue in this 
debate, because the debate shouldn't be centred on that one incident, as 
important as it may seem to hon. members.  So I'm just bringing that to the 
attention of members. 
 
While some members may be upset with the hon. member's remarks, it is an 
issue that has been brought in, brought into this debate prior to him 
rising to speak.  However, that doesn't justify it, and I don't want him to 
continue on that issue at any great length. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will respect your ruling. And 
when I say that, I am sincere about it. 
 
We've heard the members opposite speak at length about nothing.  We have 
heard stories about the Alamo go on for hours and hours.  We have heard 
stories about all kinds of trips and escapades and biblical readings and 
all the rest of that stuff.  We've heard it all from those members opposite 
who say that they want to get into a debate.  They can't carry a debate.  
They can't say in 15 or 20 minutes what they should be able to say. 
 
And this motion, Mr. Speaker, simply allows us to bring some sanity back to 
this Assembly, and it will bring sanity to this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wind up and I am indeed pleased and proud to second the 
motion. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 11:48 a.m. until 12:56 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Devine Neudorf t 
 Muller Gerich t 
 Schmidt Swenson t 
 Klein Britton t 
 Hodgins Sauder t 
 McLeod Toth t 
 Hepworth Duncan t 
 Meiklejohn Gleim t 
 Hardy McLaren t 
 Kopelchuk Baker t 
 Petersen Swan t 
 Martens Muirhead t 
 Hopfner Johnson t 
 Martin Gardner t 
-- 28 R 

Nays 
 
 Romanow Kowalsky t 
 Prebble Solomon t 
 Rolfes Atkinson t 
 Shillington Anguish t 
 Lingenfelter Hagel t 
 Tchorzewski Pringle t 
 Koskie Calvert t 
 Thompson Lautermilch t 
 Brockelbank Trew t 
 Mitchell Smart t 
 Upshall Van Mulligen t 
 Simard Koenker t 
-- 24 R 
(1300) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act (No. 2) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and other 
members of the committee, seated to my left, John Wright, deputy minister 
of Finance; behind him, Murray Schafer, director of our E&H (education and 



 

 

health) sales tax division; and to his right, Kirk McGregor, executive 
director of tax policy. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, it does not give me pleasure to enter this 
debate on clause 1 of this particular Bill, Bill 61.  And I must say, Mr. 
Chairman, as well that these last two days, today, we as legislators of the 
province of Saskatchewan are making history of sort.  But I want to say to 
you, Mr. Chairman, that it's history which should make none of us in this 
legislature, and especially no one on the government benches, very proud. 
 
Because, as has been said by my colleagues and by the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, the history that we're making is this.  For the 
first time in the 86 year history of this territory called the province of 
Saskatchewan, for the first time, a provincial government has stooped to 
using closure to force approval of a tax Bill. 
 
Think of it, Mr. Chairman.  Closure.  The denial of elected members to 
advance arguments which the government may not accept, may not agree with, 
but the denial of the right of the opposition -- any opposition -- to 
speak, to speak on the kind of legislative provision which has been the 
well-spring in the development of the history of parliament: taxes. 
 
No representation; no taxation without representation.  All of these 
slogans and ideas which gave birth to this great institution called 
parliament or legislature being denied today -- we are making history in 
what can only be described as an act of unprecedented arrogance, in what 
can only be described as closure, the ultimate proof of political 
cowardice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I've been in this legislature for some time.  
I've taken part in debates in opposition and in government.  Mr. Chairman, 
I recall many debates, many contentious issues such as deterrent fees 
imposed by the Liberal government of the late premier Ross Thatcher, 
something which he felt in very strongly and to his credit -- I didn't 
agree with him -- but he advanced as a matter of principle.  And as a 
matter of principle, we on the opposition opposed him.  There was no 
closure used by the Liberal Party or the Liberal government at that time.  
The debate ran its course. 
 
I remember being myself on the government benches when we introduced 
legislation dealing with the question of the potash controversy, a matter 
of major tax and mineral resource development and federal-provincial 
relations which had widespread ramifications on whichever side the debate 
one was on.  That debate, Mr. Chairman, lasted for three months.  I'll 
never forget it because it was my responsibility to pilot the legislation 
through the House. 
 
That debate was challenging and difficult every step of the way as the 
opposition used every tactic that it could legitimately, from petitions to 
speeches to letters to questions to long speeches, to try to deter us from 
what we felt we were doing right and correctly and pursuant to a mandate.  



 

 

There was no closure used, Mr. Chairman, at that time either.  That debate 
ran its normal course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, we had in those two examples -- but there are 
many -- clashes over principles and differing ideas and differing ideals.  
We had clashes over differing visions.  We resorted, all of us on both 
sides of the debate, to various tactics to try to move the debate along or 
to extend the debate. 
 
But at no time did any government contemplate stooping to the use of the 
dreaded tool of closure, the most basic fundamental right of any elected 
man or woman coming to this Chamber, the tactic of denying speech, the 
tactic of denying the advancing of ideas. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is an act of arrogance, I repeat again.  And more than 
that, Mr. Speaker, it is confirmation that it is an act of political 
cowardice from a government that is afraid of, as one of my colleagues said 
last night, the power of words and ideas, a government that has lost all 
touch and all courage to advance its ideas and its Bills. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- It's a government that has lost touch.  It's a government 
that has lost the authority, the moral authority, the political authority, 
to govern. 
 
Can you imagine, sir, four years, eight months into the second term of any 
administration, the introduction of a tax Bill which will take out of the 
pockets of Saskatchewan people approximately $440 million each and every 
year.  Three to four months left to go before the constitution will impose 
an election on these people opposite. 
 
Can you imagine the audacity, can you imagine the disrespect, can you 
imagine the bull-headed determination, whatever the merits of this tax 
might be in the minds of the government, of proceeding in the absence of 
getting the approval of the electorate for what they're doing in advance, 
in the absence of allowing a full and proper debate about this particular 
issue. 
 
This, Mr. Chairman, is not an act of leadership that the government is 
resorting to, as it would have us believe.  This is an act of a government 
which, I say again, has lost authority and has lost its purpose.  This is 
an act of a government which knows that it cannot win this debate with 
reason, so it resorts to the only tactic that old, decrepit, and decaying 
and soon to be defeated governments everywhere in the world resort to -- 
gagging the opposition and gagging the people. 
 
It cannot force the opposition to approve this tax to the weight of its 
arguments brought to bear on public pressure.  No, it cannot get us to 
amend our position because their arguments are strong, so it moves to 
stifle the public debate.  Tonight, last night, today -- these acts are 



 

 

really the final act of a government in its desperate attempt to impose 
undemocratically this unfair tax; that the whole history of this shoddy 
Bill is one which will not make any of us proud and which will not make any 
of the government members proud when the history of this province is 
written. 
 
Think of the history of this Bill.  February 20 or thereabouts, the 
government purports to introduce this legislation . . . not legislation, 
this tax measure by a press release.  It proposes to do so without a public 
accounting.  It proposes to do so without meeting the legislature.  It 
proposes to do it without telling us why it is that in a budget of four and 
a half billion dollars they can't find the 3 per cent necessary to fund 
GRIP and NISA by cutting back on some of its own waste and mismanagement. 
 
No, it proposes to do it by avoiding all of these answers to these 
questions.  Its idea was to put out a press release budget and to hide from 
the legislature, to hide from the public, to impose this massive tax grab 
in this thoroughly despicable and undemocratic way. 
 
And then the next step, Mr. Chairman.  When finally the legislature is 
convened and this legislation is introduced -- I might add, long after the 
tax has begun to be collected by the government and I think under 
questionable legal authority, but I'll leave that aside for the moment -- 
the government then attempts to introduce a gag motion limiting the right 
of the opposition to debate this Bill; a total of only five hours. 
 
Any self-respecting opposition had no choice, in fact had to do what was 
right, and that is to resort to measures, unprecedented measures I admit, 
to prevent the government from invoking closure in this Draconian way of 
five hours of debate only.  And the opposition responded and so too did, 
Mr. Chairman, the people of the province of Saskatchewan respond. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- More than 120,000 names on petitions have been tabled in 
opposition to what this government has been doing -- the largest petition 
drive in the history of the province of Saskatchewan.  And I want to tell 
you, Mr. Chairman, that I'm proud that our caucus provided this vehicle and 
sided with the people in order to allow the voice of the public of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan to be heard. 
 
It's ironic that this very same government which has introduced what it 
calls democratic reform legislation, so-called, before this Assembly at 
this time -- legislation which would allow citizen-initiated plebiscites 
for example, signed by about 110,000 people -- it's ironic that a 
government that introduces this legislation finds it compatible with its 
principles to ignore the views of 120,000 Saskatchewan voters and taxpayers 
who don't want this tax Bill to pass. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So much, Mr. Chairman, for the commitment to democratic 
reform.  So much to the rhetoric of the words by the Minister of Finance 



 

 

and the Premier that they're going to listen to the people.  So much to 
their vaunted new legislation.  Deeds speak louder than the words of this 
government. 
 
But that wasn't all.  Not only did they try to introduce it by press 
release, not only did they try to limit us to five hours, not only did they 
try to stop the petitions, not only did they ignore the 120,000 names on 
the petitions, then there were citizens' after citizens' groups coming to 
this Assembly, pleading with the government to be heard, business coalition 
after business coalition.  Here's a partial list: The Saskatchewan Business 
Coalition to STOP the PST, the Alliance Against a Tax on Reading, the 
independent automobile dealers and suppliers, border community retail 
merchants, the Saskatchewan restaurant association, the seniors groups, 
trade union groups -- just to name some more. 
 
I could go on and make a long speech on this, but the point is they all 
took time from their own work schedules and from their own efforts.  They 
took the time to say that democracy is not dead.  They came to this 
legislature in an effort to say that they want their views to be known and 
to be heard. 
 
And has the government listened, Mr. Chairman?  No, blind.  Again, it 
ignored the petition.  It ignored the various submissions of the groups, 
locked the doors last night on people who had a submission on another area.  
It shut down the right of people to come to this Chamber owned by these 
people. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a government that is afraid of its own shadow, Mr. 
Chairman.  It is a government which is so fearful that it can no longer 
meet the public.  It is a government which is so out of touch with the 
feelings, so arrogant, so one-dimensional, so destructive in its pursuit of 
the policy of scorched earth in the province of Saskatchewan, that the only 
solution is going to have to be a provincial election, Mr. Chairman.  And 
we say the sooner the better to get rid of these men and women and to get 
rid of these attitudes and to elect a new government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1315) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But, Mr. Chairman, as ashamed as the public is of this 
government in its dying days, I want to tell you that I am, and I think the 
public is, quite proud of what the members on this side of the House, my 
colleagues in the Assembly, have done to fight this unfair tax. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, to everyone who took the time to sign the 
petitions, to everyone who took time to write letters to the editor, to 
everyone who helped organize public meetings, to everyone who came to this 
Assembly but was not heard by the government, I say to each and every one 
of them, thank you.  I say to each and every one of them, thank you.  
Because you have shown everyone, including this timid, afraid government 
opposite, you've shown everyone that the spirit of democracy in this great 
province of ours is still alive and well. 



 

 

 
And I say this to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, have faith.  
The PC (Progressive Conservative) government today might win this vote, but 
to the people of the province I say, have faith because you will ultimately 
win.  Today the government opposite will use closure to force this tax 
through.  But I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and I say to the people of the 
province, this victory will be as hollow as it will be temporary.  Because 
sooner or later there will be an election and the people will have the last 
word and a lasting victory when it comes to democracy and this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, those people opposite may win today.  The people will 
win tomorrow. 
 
Because I make this commitment to you, Mr. Chairman, as I did on May 21 in 
Saskatoon, that right after the next  
 Delection, one of the first legislative acts of a New Democratic 
government will be to repeal this expanded 7 per cent PST (provincial sales 
tax) and to cancel the government's plan to further expand the PST until 
January 1, next January 1. 
 
I say to the people of Saskatchewan, that is our commitment.  And I say to 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan that you will have a choice.  
You will have a clear choice in the general election which is only days or 
weeks ahead, and that choice we will present to you as the opposition.  And 
I'm confident, Mr. Chairman, the people of this province will take the 
right choice to defend their families and their communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I said there will be a choice and there 
will be.  This next general election, which I will say there is no reason 
any longer for the government to delay, challenge them to call it, urge 
them to call it.  The people challenge them, urge them to call it.  There's 
no reason to delay it. 
 
This next election is going to be an election about two different visions 
about the province of Saskatchewan for the 1990s.  Make no mistake about 
that.  There is the one vision -- the plan, the difficult-choices theme of 
the Minister of Finance.  That I say, with the greatest respect to the 
Minister of Finance, is a wrong title.  Difficult choices?  That's an 
aspect of government all right.  But what's more important are right 
choices, Mr. Chairman.  Not difficult choices, but the right choices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- The correct choices.  The correct choices.  There's going 
to be a choice between the government which is now nine-years-plus in its 
age.  A government which is offering the people of Saskatchewan in the next 
election what can only be described as more of the same as we've had in the 
last nine years. 
 



 

 

I will not describe -- because although it's related to this Bill, this is 
where the money is going -- I will not go through the litany of the 
GigaTexts and the M.A.S. Medical Ltd., and the Joytec and the Supercarts 
and the Bob Andrews and the Graham Taylors and the Senator Berntsons.  One 
could go down the line.  That's where this money really is going. 
 
They have a choice of that for another four more years.  They have a choice 
about their future plan which is summarized in this recent budget -- the 
so-called, difficult-choices budget -- when the real issue is the right 
choices for families and for people.  They have a choice all right -- 
government's 10th straight deficit budget, 10th straight deficit budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know since 1947 -- I think I'm right on this one, doing 
this off the top of my head, I think I'm right on this -- since 1947 there 
have only been two deficit budgets prior to 1982.  I think it was in '60-61 
and '61-62.  Since 1947, Mr. Chairman, to 1982.  And we had droughts during 
that period and we had difficult times and we had too many grasshoppers and 
we had too many Liberals and Conservatives.  We had lots of difficulties to 
overcome. But only two deficit budgets during that period. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, in that period this great province of ours, more 
importantly the people of this great province, they somehow found it within 
their means to build two great universities.  They established a 
post-secondary education system which at one time was second to none. 
 
They established jobs for working men and women.  They put support under 
the programs for rural Canada and for rural Saskatchewan.  They provided 
paved highways, a highway system which is virtually second to none.  They 
did it, and they did it within their means because there were only two 
deficit budget during that entire period from 1947 to 1982. 
 
In fact, Mr. Chairman, the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
introduced medicare in 1962.  By the way, that's another one where there 
was no closure introduced.  That's another one.  Fought by the 
Conservatives and the Liberals, many in the opposite benches there fought 
medicare tooth and nail.  Some of them were at the rallies.  I know that 
they were there because I was watching them.  They fought it. 
 
And you know, Mr. Chairman, when we introduced medicare, we the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, we financed it, and we financed it basically 
out of the Saskatchewan taxpayer because there was not federal cost-sharing 
arrangement. 
 
It wasn't until 1968 that federal medicare came into office and then the 
financing arrangements took place at that time.  We did it because we had 
our financial house in order, because we were able to have governments 
which were prudent, fiscally responsible, that had their priorities for 
people.  They did not have deficit budgets. 
 
And along came 1982.  Nine years, ten straight deficit budgets, culminating 
in this great, unfair tax which takes another $440 million out of the 
taxpayers' pockets at a time when our economy is extremely under difficulty 
and stress. 



 

 

 
And today we've got an accumulated deficit, as everybody knows, of $5.2 
billion.  And what this Minister of Finance and this Premier wants to do in 
this Bill is to say more of the same.  More of the same.  Yes, since 1982 
they've increased the taxes, all to fight the deficit.  Of course what 
we've had is more taxes and more deficit.  They've sold off the Crown 
corporations, all to fight the deficit.  Instead we don't have the Crown 
corporations and the deficit continues to go on. 
 
And now in this Bill they say, well we're going to be increasing the taxes. 
Why?  Well to pay for GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net 
income stabilization account) and to also fight the deficit.  And we know 
on the track record that that is going to be about as factual and about as 
believable as any of the promises made by the Premier opposite in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Did it come forward with a plan to say that it's going to 
get a handle on its spending instead of more taxes?  No, the government 
didn't say that.  That was too difficult a choice apparently, for this 
government.  Instead it proposes to raise your taxes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I say to all the members of this House, I say to the Minister 
of Finance with the greatest of respect, the provincial deficit is not out 
of control because our taxes are too low.  The provincial deficit is out of 
control because we've got a government that's out of control with its 
spending and its careless operations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Don't tell the senior, don't tell the unemployed, don't 
tell the struggling small-business person, don't tell the farmer, don't 
tell the young student that's trying to get a job working or otherwise, 
that the taxes are too low and we're going to fight the deficit. 
 
We know what the statistics are, whether we're the second highest or the 
highest in Canada or if the Minister of Finance could come up with some 
other configuration of numbers.  The taxes are too high.  That's not the 
reason why the deficit is too high.  The deficit is too high not because 
our taxes are too low; the deficit is too high because these men and women 
opposite, charged with the sacred trust of managing the finances of the 
province of Saskatchewan, destroyed all of the opportunities for balancing 
and providing services through a period of nine years of reckless waste and 
want and mismanagement.  That's why the deficit is there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But they're coming to this House and to this people to say, 
more of the same.  More of the same. 
 
Well that's their vision.  But I tell you, Mr. Chairman, it isn't the New 
Democratic plan to get our economy growing and prospering in the 1990s.  We 



 

 

say it's got to be done better than that and it can be done better than 
that and it will be done better. 
 
Our plan calls for the provincial government first to cut waste and 
careless spending -- first -- before it asks anyone to pay higher taxes.  
First.  This is where these people keep on coming forward and saying, well 
where are you going to get the money from? 
 
They spend all these ads saying, where are you going to get the money from?  
Are you going to be increasing income tax, by some wild figure they pull 
out of their advertising -- by 23 per cent?  Are you going to be doing any 
. . . where are you going to be getting the money from?  You see where 
their mind-set is at? 
 
They think the only way you can get the money from the people is by 
increasing the taxes.  They cannot think of cutting their own spending 
because they've got so many ward heelers and hangers-on and contracts and 
other wasteful deals around that they cannot cut them.  They're dependent 
upon those people, and that's where the money should come from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1330) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That's why we say, Mr. Chairman, there's going to be a 
choice in this election campaign.  That's why we have fought the PST so 
vigorously, because that's what people have been telling us in the 
petitions.  There's a choice.  The choice is this government can start 
cutting back. 
 
People are telling us also that this government has no mandate, as I've 
said earlier, to bring about these plans -- all of them.  I'm talking about 
the tax Bill, but decentralization is another one.  When an election is 
days away or at least only should be days away -- no mandate -- let the 
people speak first. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let me just say a word about this tax in more specific 
detail.  We contend that this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Excuse 
me. Ignore the back-benchers on the government side because these people 
have, as I've said many times, an allergy to truth which gives them a very 
negative reaction to the democratic process; and are so silent, so silent 
of their defence of their electorate that most of them have fled from 
public office for fear of what the result's going to be in the next 
election.  Ignore them.  They're irrelevant; ignore them.  They're 
irrelevant. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to come back to the point.  I want to come back to the 
point about the PST and the tax, and what I contend is a major argument 
about this tax.  My argument that it's going to be an extremely harmful 
tax, and is proving to be a harmful tax on our economy.  If fully 
implemented, if the Premier and these men and women opposite are 
re-elected, this 7 per cent is going to take, as I've said, $440 million 
additionally a year, each and every year, out of the pockets of farmers, 



 

 

business people, consumers.  That's the situation. 
 
That, Mr. Chairman, assumes that there's another $440 million a year of 
disposable income to obtain from our families, and there isn't.  Simply 
put, this tax grab would drive an already vulnerable provincial economy 
into deeper recession, and we have many examples of this already as to 
what's been done already.  Everybody knows the statistics on the cost of 
living which has increased in Regina and Saskatoon according to the latest 
figures.  In the other major cities it's either been on hold or declined.  
There have been job losses and bankruptcies in the service sector, many 
examples of that, and the restaurant and hospitality sector. 
 
Cross-border shopping is on the rise.  Why, we had the federal minister 
coming all the way to Saskatchewan to deal the problem, and I find the 
solution to be somewhat again reflective of Tories.  The solution is not to 
deal with taxes, the solution is to put more police-officers on the border 
to really tax and make sure nobody escapes from this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I've quoted often an Estevan business person, Tim Walliser, who I've never 
met this gentleman, but who said in his local newspaper in Estevan, the 
Premier's home riding -- Quote: 
 

 "Eight hundred cars a day going through the border at one customs port.  I 
would think that is telling us something," Mr. Walliser says. 

 
 "(The government) . . . are simply forcing more people like us out of 

business." 
 

The government is simply forcing more people like us out of business. 
 
That's what it's done so far.  Now the government's defence is, well there 
are going to be these input tax credits which are going to offset some of 
the negative impacts. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- For who? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And the question that my colleague, the deputy leader says, 
for whom?  But that argument is essentially flawed. 
 
First of all, in speaking to the question, for whom, you must remember, Mr. 
Chairman, that a whole class of businesses, those in the service sector, 
are going to receive little if any help from these tax credits because 
these tax credits are designed primarily to help large companies which 
purchase large quantities of machinery, raw materials, and other taxable 
supplies rather than employ people.  That's the nature of the tax input 
credit scheme.  And that's why we saw the Minister of Energy making the 
case out for the oil companies and somebody else making out a case for a 
few of the larger operations. 
 
Restaurants, hotels, engineering firms, retail merchants, among others, 
will receive little if any benefit from these tax credits.  There'll be 
some, but very little.  And if we're out there to help the big industries, 



 

 

surely there are more cost-effective ways to help local manufacturers than 
the way this government is going about it in order to improve their export 
positions in the world.  I can think of a number of programs which would be 
targeted especially to the manufacturer or the industry involved. 
 
Surely it is not argued that a 7 per cent tax on everything from hamburgers 
to children's books is the solution.  That's a blunt instrument by which to 
try to help a selected industry with some sort of a sense of 
competitiveness in the international market. 
 
There are other ways of doing this.  And the fact that there are other ways 
of doing this, Mr. Chairman, is verified by the fact that the majority of 
the other provinces have not harmonized their tax system in order to get 
the tax input credits.  They can survive.  Manitoba is surviving; Ontario 
is surviving. 
 
This tax, Mr. Chairman, will be and is a major body-blow to the 
Saskatchewan economy.  And to buttress this argument we have released our 
arguments which show, as we contend, that the tax will cost 7,500 jobs over 
the next five years; that we're going to lose $1.37 billion worth of 
economic activity over the next five years. 
 
I think this is a fundamental point about this tax.  Even if you're a 
proponent of it, one of the fundamental issues is: do you introduce it at 
this time when the economy is hurting so much in Saskatchewan?  I'm not a 
proponent of the tax.  But if you're a proponent, surely to introduce the 
tax at this point is to severely punish an already ravaged economic system 
in the province of Saskatchewan.  Nobody can deny that.  The statistics are 
everywhere. 
 
The Minister of Finance says: well in the medium run or the long run, 
things are going to improve.  I question that statement.  But even if it's 
true, I say to the Minister of Finance, in the medium run or the long run, 
many businesses and consumers will be dead economically until we get there. 
 
Our job is to govern now as best as we can, given the circumstances that we 
have before us now.  And I might add that with this kind of a depletion 
from the economic activities of this province, there is going to be also of 
course diminished revenues to the coffers for the Minister of Finance 
because his businesses and his people leave, economic activity dries up and 
the tax base dries up as well. 
 
Simply stated, Mr. Chairman, the evidence is, in our judgement, too 
compelling.  We cannot afford to allow this tax to stand.  And that's why 
the protests.  You don't need to be a Ph.D. economist from Harvard.  You 
don't need to be, with the greatest of respect, the deputy minister of 
Finance.  All you have to do is be an ordinary working person or farmer who 
applies common sense to economic matters, and look around at what's 
happening to Sturgis or Preeceville or Kindersley or Kerrobert or Weyburn 
or Saskatoon or Regina to know that this tax is a killer on an economy 
already which is struggling for survival, and should be stopped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- How else do you explain why 120,000 people have signed 
their names? 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I could stop here and say, kill the tax for this reason, 
the economic reason that I've said, and call the election.  But I want to 
say a few more words about this issue in another context.  I want to 
advance the context of longer-term principles by which I think our finances 
in this province need to be managed for the future.  This government's not 
going to do it.  It's going to take a new government to do it. 
 
First of all, what's required is a common sense, clear game plan that is a 
game plan that the government will stick to.  That is absolutely crucial.  
I want to make one point on a game plan that the government will stick to 
and how crucial it is.  Mr. Chairman, the members of the government 
opposite are saying, you know, what is your plan?  Why do you keep on 
making these changes?  Or not changes.  What is the position that you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Freudian slip. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No, even changes.  Yes, even changes.  No, I have no 
problems in admitting to changes when the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan say you should change your policy.  Unlike the Minister of 
Finance, I'm prepared to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But I want to make this point, first of all, about a clear 
plan, a clear plan.  Mr. Chairman, I have before me here the budget address 
of the Minister of Finance for the province of Saskatchewan, March 1990.  
Here it is, sir. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to state the obvious.  This is not a speech by a 
leader of an opposition.  It is not a speech by a trade unionist or a farm 
leader.  It's not even the speech of some citizen.  This is the speech of a 
minister of a Finance of a responsible government in a responsible province 
in a responsible country to which financiers and business people look to 
determining what the government's priorities and commitments are and to 
decide whether the government has a plan. 
 
What happened last year?  Page 13 on this speech, quote, the minister 
opposite says: 
 

 Loudly and clearly, taxpayers throughout Saskatchewan are saying that tax 
increases are not acceptable. 

 
I'm going to read that again to you, Mr. Chairman: 
 

 Loudly and clearly, taxpayers throughout Saskatchewan are saying that tax 
increases are not acceptable. 

 
 The tax on lotteries was rejected (this minister said), even though the 

money was destined for the Province's hospitals.  People are outraged with 



 

 

the federal government's Goods and Services Tax (and, Mr. Chairman) -- and 
with good reason (the Minister of Finance says).  It is unfair (is what 
the Minister of Finance said). 

 
He said, "It is unfair."  And he said something more.  He said, "It is too 
complex."  And then in bold type he says: 
 

 The Goods and Services Tax is unacceptable.  Quite simply (he said), the 
people have said they have no more to give -- enough is enough. 

 
And the Minister of Finance said: 
 

 And so, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, and to all the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, this Government has listened.  There are no tax increases in 
this Budget. No increase in personal income tax.  No sales tax increase.  
No other tax increases.  The people have spoken.  Enough is enough. 

 
Those are the exact quotations. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance says from his place: that was a 
good speech; why don't you keep on reading it?  I could because I have read 
it. 
 
But here, Mr. Chairman, is the point that I'm trying to make.  This is a 
financial document from a corporation if you will -- if you can liken a 
government to a corporation.  I don't, but let's call it that way.  It's a 
budget of the province from the chief financial officer of the province, of 
$4.5 billion.  And he has set out a game plan, less than a year ago or 
about a year ago, saying that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
say, enough is enough, no more taxes.  That's the game plan upon which he 
says he is going to proceed. 
 
Mr. Chairman, why I got off onto that little side diversion was to 
emphasize and to underline my point that what this province has not been 
getting for the last nine years has been a common sense, clear game plan 
economically and fiscally, to which the people of the province could adhere 
to and understand and get behind and rally. 
 
First of all we're going to privatize like crazy, and then we're going to 
pull back on privatization because the public doesn't want it.  Now we're 
going to tax on lottery taxes, but then we're going to pull back because 
enough is enough.  We're saying there's no more sales tax increases, and 
all of a sudden, whoops, here comes a big, harmonized 7 per cent expanded 
PST sales. 
 
There has not been in the nine years of this administration any consistent 
economic game plan.  They have had one foot on the gas pedal and one foot 
on the brake.  Is it any wonder, therefore, that our economy is skidding 
out of control and is about to wreck on the shoals of PC policies opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- How does the Minister of Finance meet with the financiers 



 

 

of New York city to justify this budget?  When the Minister of Finance 
travels to New York and says, I need the money to keep this province 
afloat, how does -- I'm not going to mention the officials because I'm a 
firm believer it's elected people to elected people -- but how in the world 
do these people hold their heads up in the financial community, in the 
business community?  It's no wonder that the business community has 
basically, has basically written this government off. 
 
Well my answer to the Minister of Finance is very simple.  If you were of 
that mind, why didn't you tell the financial community in 1990 that's what 
you were doing to do?  Why didn't you tell them that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I'll tell you the real reason why he didn't tell them that 
in 1990, the people of Saskatchewan.  Because they were gearing up for an 
election in 1990, so they thought.  He will advance another reason about 
the GST advisory committee.  But the reality is that this was an election 
budget going in 1990.  That's why all these false promises with a financial 
document like the budget that was made, and the lack of the game plan.  
That's the real reason.  Enough is enough. 
 
And this is not a Leader of an Opposition making a reversal.  This is not 
my colleague, the member from Elphinstone or the Deputy Leader or my 
colleague from Quill Lakes.  This is the Minister of Finance for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There used to be a time, Mr. Chairman, when what the Minister of Finance 
said in a budget and what the financial documents were could be relied upon 
as part of a game plan whether you agreed with it or disagreed with it.  
There used to be a time of integrity in finances and the only way we're 
going to recapture that time again is if we defeat every one of those 
Conservative members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1345) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Oh yes, there will be choice in this election campaign, Mr. 
Chairman, so we need a plan.  And what would be some of the key elements of 
a plan as we see it? 
 
Well first of all, obviously, since you cannot rely virtually on anything 
that the department of budget, Minister of Finance documents say -- that is 
clearly the case, because they keep on changing from year to year -- the 
first thing we've got to do is open up the books.  I make a commitment to 
you, Mr. Chairman, and the people of the province of Saskatchewan, that 
within the first 60 to 90 days of a change in the government, we will have 
a thoroughly completed, independent check of the financial records of the 
province of Saskatchewan from top to bottom.  We will invite those members 
who are still here to explain; and those who are not here, we will invite 
them in to explain. 
 



 

 

We will open up these books from top to bottom and we will invite 
independent people who are not political to tell us exactly how it is that 
the debt of the province of Saskatchewan, according to the last statement 
of 1982, the July 1982 statement, signed by one Mr. Bob Andrew, showed the 
net debt to be $3.3 billion; and why it is that today's debt under the 
latest budget address, under the current Minister of Finance, under the 
same category, shows the debt not 3.3 billion, but in nine years, $14.1 
billion.  We want to know that. 
 
We're going to want to know this.  We want to know how bad things really 
are.  We want to know how bad things really are.  So the first thing that 
any responsible government, new government, will do is to come in and to 
check the books and to do the audit of the books.  That's what they do when 
corporations move in and take over other corporations.  We'll have an 
assessment.  We're going to find out exactly how bad things are and then 
we're going to settle on the new priorities that the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan want us to pursue -- priorities for families and for 
people.  That's the first thing. 
 
Secondly and concurrently we've got to start a meaningful economic 
development strategy.  Not one which has one foot on the gas pedal and one 
foot on the brakes as the members opposite do, but a different one.  I 
won't bore you with the details today because we're discussing another 
Bill.  But we will use our tax money in this way, Mr. Chairman, rather than 
being mesmerized in the 1980s by megaprojects like the big projects at 
Cargill and Pocklington and the like.  We think the 1990s and the financial 
picture of the 1990s dictates that we look to Main Street in Saskatchewan 
and to local business to create wealth, targeting profits for them and 
targeting their export opportunities and their innovation and their 
entrepreneurial skills and their job creation.  Because this is a key, when 
people work, they have happier, more productive lives.  But to state the 
obvious, everybody gets more revenue, including the province of 
Saskatchewan, without tax increases -- jobs, creation, stimulation. 
 
Thirdly, you've got to look at the question of ending government waste.  I 
want to stress this point very briefly, Mr. Speaker, in the context of this 
Bill because the government says it needs more.  Mr. Chairman, $4.5 billion 
is what the government proposes to spend.  I say to you, sir, I say to the 
Minister of Finance, I say to the members from Yorkton and others that in a 
province of less than a million people, in a province where there may be -- 
what, Mr. Minister of Finance? -- 350,000 taxpaying people, I say that $4.5 
billion in a province of less than a million people ought to be enough to 
get the job done in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And to get the job done to finance GRIP and NISA, $123 
million for GRIP and NISA, the Saskatchewan portion . . . which by the way 
can make another speech on an occasion about whether or not we negotiated 
the best deal for the taxpayers, just the cost.  Be that aside for the 
moment, 123 is about 3 per cent, by my calculations on the budget, of $4.5 
billion.  And this Minister of Finance and this Premier are going to tell 
the farmers in this election campaign that they couldn't find that money 



 

 

out of $4.5 billion. 
 
Well I tell you that we'll find that $123 million, and we'll find it 
through that independent audit of opening the books.  And we'll find it by 
changing the priorities from all the Bob Andrews and all the Cargills of 
the world and changing the priorities to the farmers and the working men 
and women of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, what the Minister of Finance is telling, and 
what the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan is telling our people, is 
that out of a budget of $4.5 billion, he can't find that money for GRIP and 
NISA.  What business person, what farmer in the last few years hasn't been 
forced to cut back by 3 per cent.  Mr. Chairman, I know that you're a 
farmer and I know things have been tough for all farmers.  I don't know 
your personal situation.  I think you're a very good farmer but probably 
you've had the same pressures.  You've had to cut back by 3 per cent on 
your expenditures and you've had to make do. 
 
You've had to live within your budget, sir.  I've had to live within my 
budget.  The Minister of Finance has had to live within his budget.  Why in 
the world can't the Government of Saskatchewan live within its own budgets?  
It must under a new government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So we're going to open the books.   
 DWe're going to tackle the waste and mismanagement, to live within our 
means.  We're going to stimulate the economy in a different way than these 
people are -- huge bucks for the Cargills of the world -- we're going to 
put them to Main Street. 
 
We're going to do a fourth thing.  People say: where are you going to get 
the money from?  Well we're going to do another thing.  We're going to 
review these business deals by this government. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this is against all that I have been used to in political 
life but I just can't hold back -- Cargill and the deal at Belle Plaine.  
This, of the documents that we have which are press releases, is structured 
on this basis -- $64 million cash Cargill; $65 million cash the taxpayers 
for Cargill.  By the way, the world's largest privately owned corporation.  
I don't think, Mr. Chairman -- I think I'm still correct on this -- that 
you can buy a share of Cargill if you had the spare money . . . privately 
held.  One million dollars by some yet unnamed, third-party banker. 
 
They now form Saferco.  Then they go and they borrow another $305 million 
for which, Mr. Chairman, all of us in this Chamber and all of us in this 
province are committed solely. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But what about Cargill? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No, no, Cargill's not on there.  That is the existing deal.  



 

 

But here's the point that I want to make.  In what jurisdiction in Canada 
could you get away with this deal without having any of the documents or 
the contracts or the financial arrangements or the marketing arrangements 
or any of the other deals and side aspects of this, being fully tabled on 
the floor of this legislature, for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the journalists. 
 
Have the journalists inquired?  I don't see much of that.  Surely the 
back-benchers, they must in caucus ask: now what in the world are you doing 
here, Mr. Minister of Finance?  What fee does Cargill get paid for its 
marketing?  We don't have the facts. You see the point that I'm giving by 
this example.  When they ask where are you going to get the money from, 
well I'm saying to you, sir, and to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, that we're going to open up all of these business deals. 
 
I'll give you another example, Mr. Chairman.  When they applied closure for 
the first time a year ago so back on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
privatization, we find out subsequently that that deal cost the taxpayers 
$440 million.  That's an undisputed figure.  That's a good deal.  And 
mainly it cost it because in their rush to go to the market, they made the 
share offering so attractive that it simply didn't work out in a way that 
the taxpayers got their fair share, talking about fair share.  Four hundred 
and forty million dollars . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What about share offerings? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, share offerings because you went at the time when you 
know doggone well it was not the time to get the best price for what you 
were offering.  You did that. 
 
And you're doing that now with Cameco exactly the same way.  Scorched earth 
policy.  You want that 15 per cent privatized in Cameco because you think 
somehow that when an NDP government comes into place, we will not be able 
to look at that privatization.  Think again, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister 
of Finance, because we will review every one of these privatizations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify why I'm doing this.  
Not because I approach this from an ideological perspective, I'm 
approaching this, Mr. Chairman, from the question about how do we get money 
elsewhere -- as the Minister of Finance challenges us, I've already defined 
three or four sources -- with respect to financing for these programs and 
tackling the deficit of the budget over the longer while. 
 
And I'm going to ask business people and others in the community, publicly, 
to open the books in those deals -- publicly, every one of them.  And 
they're going to be asked to help us answer the question: were they done in 
accordance to business terms?  Were they done in accordance to economic and 
fiscal terms?  Were they done in accordance with the practices of the day?  
Were they done in the best interests of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Because I believe, Mr. Chairman, that a lot of them were not.  And if not, 



 

 

a new government is going to renegotiate with a view to maximizing the 
revenues for the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- There's another source.  I want to identify a fifth area 
where you can get the money from: federal off-loading.  I say this 
government has been as silent as a pussy-cat -- or how silent can you get?  
Pretty silent -- to whatever Mr. Mulroney says.  And when Mr. Mulroney 
embarked on off-loading, there was absolute silence. 
 
You know, if I'm correct here . . . the Minister of Finance can correct me.  
But on my research as I understand it, federal transfer payments to 
Saskatchewan -- Mr. Chairman, get this -- federal transfer payments, money 
moving from Ottawa to Regina to help us finance our operations here, will 
be down by more that $423 million a year for each of the next three years.  
That's about the amount that the new PST when closure -- looks like its 
going to work -- comes into place.  That's the loss of revenue.  Now if we 
could afford it, if Saskatchewan was a have province, maybe you could say 
that there's some argument to this. 
 
But this is wrong for two reasons, Mr. Chairman.  It's wrong because we are 
in an economically difficult province and difficult strait right now.  And 
we should be having a Minister of Finance and a Premier saying to the Prime 
Minister, look you have obligations under the constitution with respect to 
equalization; you simply cannot do it.  You have a responsibility; you 
cannot do it.  That's one reason. 
 
And there's another reason.  He should be saying to the Prime Minister of 
Canada, you can't do it because as Prime Minister of Canada you cannot 
allow the regions of the country to fall into disparity like this does.  
It's happened in health care.  It's happened in education.  It's happened 
on GRIP and NISA. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, that what we need to have is a government here in 
Saskatchewan which is prepared to bargain tough and to bargain patiently, 
not to bargain in any offensive way but to bargain with reason to convince 
Ottawa that it's got to live up to its responsibilities, financial and 
otherwise, as the true national government for all Canadians.  And if we 
succeed -- and I think we will succeed -- there will be additional revenue 
to be able to finance these programs and handle the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, I could go on in answering the question, 
well where are you going to get the money from?  I've given you four or 
five areas here of where we think we can get the money from.  I predict, as 
I stand here, that the Minister of Finance's defence will be, you can't do 
it, because all during this debate the back-benchers got up and they said, 
well you can't do it. 
 
No, Mr. Chairman, that's not an answer.  Not that you can't do it, the 
answer is they cannot do it, Mr. Chairman, and will not do it.  That's the 



 

 

answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Four point five billion dollars for a province of less than 
a million people, and they say they can't do it.  That's got to be enough.  
That's how we're going to have to start rebuilding confidence in the 
economy of Saskatchewan, business into us and us into business and how 
we're going to start rebuilding the confidence of the farming community.  
They say they can't do it. 
 
Well, you doggone right, Mr. Chairman.  They've proven it; ten deficit 
budgets in a row.  They can't do it.  But a brand-new government, an NDP 
government, will do it for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1400) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- A plan.  Oh, they'll get up and say that's no plan.  That's 
the plan.  They may not like it, but that's the plan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It won't work. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And it won't work the Minister of Finance says right now.  
He can't do it.  I know he can't do it.  That's why they're riding at 18 
and 19 per cent of the popular opinion polls because the people of 
Saskatchewan know that they can't do it. 
 
Yes, there will be a choice -- theirs which is more of the same which we 
say is wrong, or ours which is a consistent game plan.  And in this next 
election campaign therefore, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan people will have a 
clear choice.  They'll have a clear choice about vision and philosophy; 
compassion; hope versus despair; incompetence.  They'll have all those 
choices.  They'll have choices with respect to candidates. 
 
But they'll have another choice.  They will have a clear choice between two 
economic plans.  A vote for the Premier and the PCs will be a vote for the 
new 7 per cent expanded PST with all of its damaging consequences to our 
economy and a continuation of more of the same.  And a vote for the New 
Democrats will be a vote to stop this tax, restore confidence in our 
economy, provide jobs, and get building again as the province is used to.  
That's the choice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That's the choice. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, as I close, today the government is using its legislative 
majority and closure in an unprecedented way to force this tax through and 
get its way. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I urge you, sir, and the members opposite, not to think 



 

 

for one moment that the battle is over.  The battle may be over in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, but this battle is only begun and it will 
continue right till election night when the ballots are counted.  The 
battle now moves to the voters and the farmers and the business people, in 
the towns and the villages and the streets and everywhere in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  This battle is not over.  This battle has only begun. 
 
Mark my words, Mr. Chairman.  And we know where you stand.  We know your 
situation.  We know your game plan.  You know ours.  That is where the 
battle will be. 
 
And each one of these people opposite who stood last night and voted: (a) 
for an attack on democracy by closure; (b) for the biggest tax increase in 
our history; (c) for a continuation of more of the same -- each one of 
these men and women opposite will be required to answer to their 
constituents, sooner now than later. 
 
What is tragic about this, Mr. Chairman, is the legacy that will be left 
behind by this administration.  When the historians write of this nine 
years, when they write of this nine years of debt, waste -- just think of 
all of the scandals after scandals after scandals -- when they see the 
partisanship of government approaches to people like the Provincial 
Auditor; when they see the misuse of trust with respect to advertising; 
when they see the confusion; when they see the sheer incompetence; this is 
a legacy that historians when they write will condemn this sorry nine-year 
period as one of the worst blights in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I'm sorry to use those words.  I am very sorry to use those words because I 
do think they are in a way excessive.  But I use them because, Mr. 
Chairman, the evidence is so overwhelming, so overwhelming that that's what 
historians will write and conclude. 
 
Shame on them, Mr. Chairman, shame on them.  Having inherited a province 
with traditions and with assets and with hope, they have brought us to 
this.  Shame on them.  Shame on them for not standing up for the people.  
Shame on them. 
 
And I say, Mr. Chairman, that come the next election the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, I know, are more resilient than nine years of 
Tories.  They are more optimistic.  They are more innovative.  They work 
hard.  They're compassionate and they're co-operative.  I have more faith 
in them to rebuild the province.  I know that we can do it, and I know that 
the decade of the 1990s can once again be Saskatchewan's decade, if only we 
get a new government.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I don't know as there was a question there, Mr. 
Speaker, relative to any of the clauses, but I'll pick up on some of the 
points that the hon. member has raised. 
 
I mean, really when you look at all of the issues and the challenges that 



 

 

face Saskatchewan today, this man would have us believe that he has some 
kind of magical power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He has said that he can find the money to fund the farm programs -- the 
$125 million -- which he says aren't good enough and that he would 
renegotiate.  And Lord knows what that might cost.  He says he can lower 
taxes.  He says he can give targeted assistance to business.  When he was 
asked about the three and a half per cent increases that we gave Health and 
Education this year, he said we would absolutely give them more, so he can 
give even more than the hundred-and-some-odd-million dollars that we gave 
Health and Education budgets this year.  And he and his members have also 
said in all the other areas that were cut back, Mr. Speaker, he has said 
that he would spend that money and more and add back to those budgets, that 
he would tear up other agreements, Mr. Speaker.  And all of this, he says 
he would still balance the budget, Mr. Speaker, and balance the books, and 
that he could accomplish all of this, Mr. Speaker, within that framework. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and to other members of this legislature 
and to the public, can this man be believed?  Can this man be believed, Mr. 
Chairman?  I think why the public say no to that question, Mr. Chairman, is 
for this reason:  when he made the announcement, not in this legislature, 
not before the Legislative press gallery, but in Saskatoon where he 
couldn't be questioned, Mr. Chairman, because his handlers whisked him 
away, one of the NDP handlers said to the media afterwards -- because they 
were displaying some frustration at not being able to ask him questions 
about his policy and his plans -- he said, well it made great TV and that's 
all that counts. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this plan of attack by the NDP on this Bill, this populist 
approach to say to the world that we can reduce your tax and still handle 
all the challenges, is nothing more than pure politics to get that member 
elected, Mr. Speaker -- nothing more, nothing less. 
 
Some members of the business community that were called upon to examine 
some documents that later showed up in quite a different context than they 
had expected, Mr. Chairman, called his approach intellectually dishonest.  
And quite frankly, I think the public of Saskatchewan will see through 
that, Mr. Chairman.  I believe they will see through that. 
 
I think the public of Saskatchewan have had enough of the NDP leader's 
pretensions that somehow all of these challenges don't exist and that 
somehow by controlling this infamous waste and mismanagement that he 
continually refers to, that he can get the books in order, still fund the 
programs, still balance the books, still drop the deficit and do all those 
kinds of things. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that simply, he is being intellectually 
dishonest as others have said outside this Chamber. 
 
Let's pick up one of the first points that he raised, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is the announcement of the budget outside . . . the announcement of the tax 
changes outside the legislature.  If he really believed in that principle, 
the principle that major tax announcements ought to be made inside this 



 

 

legislature, I say to the Leader of the Opposition and the NDP: where were 
they in late December of 1990?  Where were they when the Minister of 
Finance, I, announced outside this legislature a $25 million tax change? 
 
Did we hear cries of protest from the opposition, from the Leader of the 
Opposition then, just four or five months ago?  Did we hear one word of 
protest, that what is going on here, Mr. Minister of Finance?  You should 
be in the legislature if you're making announcements of that magnitude.  
There is a principle at stake here.  Did we hear one word of protest?  No, 
we didn't, Mr. Chairman.  Do you know why?  Because that tax change put $25 
million on an annual basis into the pockets of the consumers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The tax change I'm referring to is the clause -- clause 3 in this Bill, Mr. 
Chairman -- that changes the law of Saskatchewan today, which reads that 
the Saskatchewan E&H tax will be collected as the last tax.  Cost of the 
item, federal taxes, total cost of those things, and we always put our tax 
on last, so we're in effect putting some tax not only on the item, but also 
other taxes that on that item, we put it on.  Now with this, Mr. Chairman, 
we'll take that tax off and put them side by side. 
 
Now if this man is so principled as he suggests, Mr. Chairman, why was 
there not an outcry?  Why was there not an outcry from that member and that 
member and that member when that tax change was made, Mr. Chairman?  Is 
there an element of hypocrisy in this holier-than-thou stance of the Leader 
of the Opposition?  I would suggest, yes, there is, Mr. Chairman.  That's 
what I would suggest. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have heard no alternatives as to how this opposition would 
indeed come up with $125 million to fund the farm programs, or $100 million 
to reduce the deficit year over as we have this year. 
 
Of course when he's asked about his plan, he talks about waste and 
mismanagement.  That's where he'd get the money for the farm program.  But 
then of course when he's asked about . . . well you said you wanted to 
spend more money on health and education, where would you get that money, 
he said: well I'd cut down on those three or four examples of waste and 
mismanagement that I gave you.  That's where I'd get the money.  And when 
he's asked about, well where would you get the money to reduce the deficit 
by a hundred million dollars: well I'd cut down the waste and mismanagement 
in those same three or four areas. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, and members of the legislature, I mean I've heard of 
double counting before but this is triple and quadruple counting.  I ask 
you: how many times has the Leader of the Opposition spent the savings that 
he said are there by cutting back on paper and advertising?  How many times 
has he spent those five or ten million dollars or whatever the number is? 
 
Is that being intellectually honest with the public?  Don't you think that 
the public know that if we could balance the books by cutting back further 
. . . because we have cut back.  We've been accused every budget that I've 
been in this legislature by the NDP opposition, we've been accused every 
budget that I have been in in this legislature that we've been making 



 

 

cut-backs, cut-backs, cut-backs, cut-backs, when in fact the budget was 
going up and up and up and up, Mr. Chairman.  We've been accused of that. 
 
(1415) 
 
And now he's saying by cutting down further than we have on travel and the 
size of government and paper and advertising, that somehow you can do all 
these miraculous things in all of these areas. 
 
The public see through it, Mr. Chairman.  The reality is, when he announced 
that if he's elected that he'll repeal this tax, the reality is, Mr. 
Chairman, what he is really saying to the public of Saskatchewan . . . he 
looks around him, he sees a debt and deficit that must be dealt with, he 
sees an economy that must be dealt with, he sees the challenges that we 
face of moving into the global realities of the 1990's.  These are major, 
major challenges; major, major problems for some. 
 
And I just repeat, I just repeat, Mr. Chairman.  It's like Linus told 
Charlie Brown -- that's just what the NDP are doing -- they're saying, as 
Linus told Charlie Brown when Charlie Brown went into all these problems 
that Charlie Brown always has, Linus said to him, well there's no problem 
too big you can't walk away from.  And that's exactly what the Leader of 
the Opposition has done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- He said the problems are so massive, I'll just throw 
up my hands, promise the people I can lower their taxes and expect them to 
believe me.  Well I'll tell you the public of Saskatchewan will not be 
fooled because they expect, yes, responsible government, but they also 
respect responsible opposition. 
 
And he talks about, Mr. Chairman, he talks about reckless spending in this 
decade.  And yet, as I said earlier, every budget that I've ever been a 
part of in this legislature now for some nine and a half years, every time, 
no matter what the area was that didn't get enough money or if it was cut 
back, the opposition would say, spend more, spend more, spend more, spend 
more; you've cut back, cut back, cut back. 
 
And now they suddenly say, oh you've been spending too much.  It's reckless 
spending, Mr. Chairman.  How is it, unless you're really wanting to be 
intellectually dishonest, how is it that you can go through and trace back 
through 10 years of our government's administration, how is it that you can 
trace through that period and not mention once, not mention once the 
challenges that this Premier has faced in this decade that are very real 
and that we faced elsewhere. 
 
If you really want to be honest with the people, how can you go through a 
recitation of the economic challenges that we face and where we're at today 
and not mention some of those challenges. 
 
Now I'm not saying that they're responsible for everything that we face 
fiscally, Mr. Chairman.  But I think if you're going to be honest with the 



 

 

people, at least you've got to acknowledge the price that we've paid 
because of high interest rates and a high dollar policy. 
 
The fact that we did have a couple of years drought; the fact that our 
farmers have been caught in a cross-fire, a trade war, cross-fire for some 
several years now, that has resulted in a 61-year low price for wheat. 
 
Now don't you think, Mr. Chairman, because you too do farm, don't you think 
that a Leader of the Opposition in a major speech on the state of the 
economy and the state of the budget, don't you think he would have to 
mention the word agriculture?  And if he did mention it, don't you think 
he'd have to say, yes that is a major challenge we face when wheat has been 
forced down because of this trade war, to a 61-year low. 
 
Is it not intellectually dishonest to ignore that fact, Mr. Chairman?  Is 
it not?  And why we're doing these difficult changes, because we believe 
this party, this Premier believes, it's our duty to help farmers and the 
farm families and the farm communities cope with the fact that wheat is at 
a 61-year low and we will help those farmers and farm families, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- They have been silent on how they would help farmers 
and farm families, except to say that we'd tear up the existing deal and 
renegotiate a new deal with the feds. 
 
Well that was part of his remarks today, Mr. Chairman.  He says, if you 
elect an NDP government we're going to strike a better deal with the 
federal government and Prime Minister Mulroney. 
 
Now I'll tell you, I saw a cartoon in the paper the other day with a bunch 
of guys with long noses.  Well that  
 Dwould pretty well epitomize I think that kind of statement coming from 
that kind of member.  They have constantly criticized the Prime Minister 
and yet they say, well I think if we were in these chairs, because we're on 
good terms with the Prime Minister, we could probably have got a better 
deal on GRIP and NISA, etc., etc., etc. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Chairman, when they were in power, did they get a deal 
on anything that helped our farmers or Saskatchewan?  I'll tell you what 
kind of a deal they got.  They didn't get one ounce of movement on interest 
rates, Mr. Chairman.  They just said no, that's a federal responsibility. 
 
When interest rates were 22 per cent in 1980-81, they said that's a federal 
responsibility.  We can't do anything about it.  I know home owners are 
losing their houses, but I'm sorry, it's a federal responsibility.  And 
when farmers were losing their farms and couldn't buy farms because of 22 
per cent interest rate, they said no, that's a federal responsibility, I'm 
sorry.  We can't do anything about it, Mr. Chairman.  And yet today he 
would have us believe, no, I'm sure we can cut better deals with the feds 
than those Tories can.  He said yes, I'm a good guy and I'm sure I can cut 
a better deal. 



 

 

 
What kind of a deal did he cut?  Only one deal and he sold out 
Saskatchewan.  The oil, the national energy program, and he was part of 
that deal, Mr. Chairman -- and what good was that for Saskatchewan?  Cost 
us maybe six, six and a half million dollars.  Well if that's the kind of 
deal-making he's talking about, I say to you and I say to the oil patch and 
I say to the taxpayers of this province, I hope he never gets close to the 
levers of federal-provincial negotiations ever again, Mr. Chairman.  
Because that is his track record. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I've already talked about the fact that on the one hand 
the Leader of the Opposition would say that $4.5 million in spending should 
be enough for a province of a million people.  He says $4.5 million should 
be enough.  And yet he says, when asked about would you spend more than a 
three and a half per cent increase on health and education, which make up 
53 per cent of the budget, Mr. Chairman, he says no, I would absolutely 
give them more, I would absolutely give them more, he said. 
 
I think in fact I even have a news clipping where he said that, Mr. 
Chairman.  In fact I do, recently.  Melville Advance, very recently, and I 
quote from this article that's headlined: "Romanow evasive on health, 
education spending increases". 
 

 In an interview following his speech, (and I'm quoting) Romanow said an 
NDP government would (and this is in quotation marks, Mr. Chairman) 
"absolutely" give more money to health and education than the current PC 
government's 3.5 per cent increases as announced in the recent provincial 
budget. 

 
 But he refused to be pinned down on the exact amount of the increase. 
 

You see, what he's saying, Mr. Chairman, is he'll say anything anywhere to 
get the vote.  You see, he's saying that if they're asking if this 
legitimate special interest area of health needs more money, and somebody 
asks him, do you think you could give more money or would you give more 
money?  Yes, I sure would. 
 
What about education if he's at the university or at a school board?  Yes, 
I'd give him more than those darn Tories gave.  And what about culture?  
Yes, I'd give more there.  And GRIP and NISA, our farm program?  Yes, I do 
better than Devine did there.  He says, I'd give more everywhere, and yet 
today he stands in his place and says: but we should only spend $4.5 
billion. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, this budget here proposes to spend $4.8 billion.  Now 
he says he's going to give more in all of these areas and as well spend 
$300 million less than we're spending this year, balance the books, tear up 
GRIP and NISA, get rid of the sales tax, which would cost him . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, he's got to find, I don't know, 5, 6, $800 million.  He's 
going to spend $300 million less than we're proposing here, Mr. Chairman, 
and give more money to all of those areas.  Now this is indeed an amazing 



 

 

magician, Mr. Chairman, an amazing magician, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Well, he talks . . . he went on then to talk about, Mr. Chairman, game 
plans.  Now I should back up, Mr. Chairman, first.  And I think he 
acknowledges or has acknowledged in his budget reply on budget night, he 
acknowledged that businesses would benefit from harmonization.  I forget 
what his exact words were but I think he said something to the effect that 
some businesses undoubtedly would benefit from harmonization.  But of 
course when it was a matter of politics and votes, Mr. Chairman, he made 
ultimately the decision to repeal.  And so with it goes the biggest tax 
break that business has probably ever seen in this province. 
 
And what he says, how he says he would replace it -- and this is another 
area where he's going to spend some more money, Mr. Chairman -- he says he 
would replace it with a targeted assistance program, a targeted assistance 
program.  He doesn't put any dollar value on that.  That's another one of 
these things.  I'll spend more but I won't tell you how much, and nor will 
I tell you how to do it or where I'm going to get the money.  Now I would 
suggest to me that this notion of his, targeted assistance, speaks volumes 
about that man and about his economic game plan. 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, if he truly wanted to be the modern socialist he 
kind of likes to present himself as, that he sort of, you know, left back 
the old ways of the democratic socialist government of the 1960s and '70s, 
and that he really is now a socialist who has been able to grapple with not 
only wealth distribution, but wealth creation, when he comes out and tells 
me his economic game plan is targeted assistance for business, it tells me 
he's just lapsed back into his old ways, Mr. Chairman.  It tells me that 
this member tested the water, dipped his foot in the water of the ocean of 
the 1990s, Mr. Chairman, and found the water not to his liking. 
 
It shows you, Mr. Chairman, that yes, the 1990s is out there and it 
represents hope and opportunity for our young people and for our province, 
and yes, we do need to make changes and they have to be fundamental 
changes, but it's too big a challenge and it's too politically risky.  So 
rather than, really for the first time, endorse a policy that speaks 
directly to wealth creation, which is what harmonization speaks to with the 
business input tax credit, he said, no, I'll repeal it and I'll give them 
the old sort of 1960s aid-for-trade targeted tax assistance program. 
 
Now why do I say that that is actually absolutely a step right back into 
the '70s and '60s, Mr. Chairman?  This reason:  in this day and age of 
global trade liberalization which they themselves spoke so much about 
during the free trade debate about the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade) -- you know, don't put all your eggs in one basket; we should 
look at the multinational dimension -- this targeted business assistance 
approach that he's talking about is exactly why we have the problems today 
that we have in the world. 
 
You see, targeted assistance, which he has consistently been against, until 
now, is countervailable.  You see, he has no sense of what is going on in 
terms of global realities today.  You name me one industry where you can 
target assistance and not have it countervailable, Mr. Chairman.  I 



 

 

challenge him to name me one. 
 
And that's why in any of the ventures that we are into, we've been 
extremely careful to construct them as strictly a commercial deal.  
Because, Mr. Chairman, we don't want our products being denied access to 
the world markets, because people in this province make their living, Mr. 
Chairman, by selling into the world market-place. 
 
This man has global myopia, Mr. Chairman, and our children would pay the 
price if we ever let him get close to the levers of world trade in his role 
as a premier of this province, Mr. Chairman.  That is the fundamental flaw 
with that old '60s approach, Mr. Chairman.  It would be countervailable.  
It would shut our products out of the world market-place.  And yet that's 
what he says is his game plan.  That's what he says is his game plan, Mr. 
Chairman.  Well what are others saying about the game plan of the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman?  What are others saying? 
 
Let's look, Mr. Chairman, at what others are saying.  They don't call . . . 
some journalists have called the NDP lack of an economic game plan a shabby 
performance, and quite frankly I agree with them.  Well let's look at an 
independent group, the independent Investment Dealers Association of 
Canada.  And what have they said about Saskatchewan and our economic game 
plan, Mr. Chairman?  One of the headlines was, Mr. Chairman, in May of this 
year: "Sask. gets an A for economic growth". 
 
Doesn't sound too shabby to me, Mr. Chairman.  One of only three provinces 
projected to have a real increase in GDP (gross domestic product), Mr. 
Chairman -- 10 per cent increase in business spending because of upgraders 
and fertilizer plants and diversification. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Chairman, manufacturing investment now one-quarter of total business 
investment, tripled since 1986.  I want to repeat that one, Mr. Chairman.  
Manufacturing investment is now one-quarter of total business investment in 
the province -- tripled since 1986.  Saskatchewan personal income taxes 
rates, second lowest in the country. 
 
And what was their summary conclusion, the Investment Dealers Association 
of Canada, Mr. Chairman, relative to Saskatchewan?  Their summary was this 
and I quote: that consistent application of fiscal restraint, the hallmark 
of fiscal policy for the last five years, will lead to steep declines in 
the budget deficit over the next several years as the economic recovery 
takes hold.  This fiscal discipline also underlines the government's 
commitment to meet its target for a balanced budget in '93-94. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, that's why we get headlines: "Sask. gets an A for 
economic growth", Mr. Chairman.  In fact, after the budget, an official 
from the Canadian Bond Rating Service, Mr. Speaker, said "Lorne Hepworth's 
three year plan to balance the Budget is a good sign."  That's another 
thing, what a bond rating agency was saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now other governments, one other government, Mr. Chairman, across Canada 



 

 

has taken quite a different approach than we have and a quite different 
approach than most other provinces, Mr. Chairman.  That government is the 
NDP government of Ontario, the NDP government of Ontario. 
 
Now what are the investment dealers saying about the NDP budget with its 
spending going like this, Mr. Chairman -- up, up, and away?  Well the 
headline in the Toronto Star was, Bay Street protests NDP budget.  Now 
that's the same investment dealers, Mr. Chairman, that said Saskatchewan 
gets an A.  And what do they say about the NDP budget in Ontario that's 
going the opposite direction to everybody else in the country?  Bay Street 
protests NDP budget.  And they've called it lunacy and fantasy land and all 
the rest of it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now one other thing, one other agreement, this man said that elect him and 
he will tear up or re-examine -- or whatever his words were -- is the 
Cargill involvement, the Saskatchewan government's involvement in the 
Saferco fertilizer plant.  He says, Mr. Chairman, that quite simply he 
didn't get enough information.  He didn't get the books opened up to his 
satisfaction in Saferco.  That's what he said consistently. 
 
Well two points here, Mr. Chairman.  I would like the hon. member to get 
his research or his hacks . . . and there must be lots of them, and they 
must be good, Mr. Chairman, because they wrote the report -- the NDP hack 
economist report about the harmful effects of harmonization, so they must 
be good.  He must rely on them.  Why don't you ask them to dig up your 
remarks -- yours, sir.  When you nationalized the potash industry and you 
were asked to open those books up and you talked about, well no, we can't 
do it, Mr. Chairman, because we can't give away that kind of information, 
Mr. Speaker, because it's confidential information.  It might jeopardize 
our business position. 
 
So that's one point I would make, Mr. Chairman.  But I see, Mr. Chairman, 
I've hit a bit of a nerve there.  I've hit a bit of a nerve there.  So, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to submit this to you.  Do you think it would be 
reasonable, Mr. Chairman, if the U.S. Securities Commission, do you think 
it would be reasonable, Mr. Chairman, if the U.S. Securities Commission . . 
. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, please.  Order.  Until about 10 minutes ago, the 
decorum in the committee had been relatively good, I would say.  And in the 
last few minutes -- order, please -- in the last few minutes the decorum 
has been dwindling and I would ask members on both sides of the House to 
please adhere to the rules of the committee and allow the Minister of 
Finance to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, they don't like the argument I just used 
that in the potash debate -- if you check the records -- they would not 
because of the business confidentiality reveal those numbers. 
 
But let's suppose you don't accept that number.  Let's suppose . . . do you 
think, Mr. Chairman . . . let's ask this question.  Do you think an 
examination of the books by the U.S. Securities Commission would be a 
satisfactory bench-mark as to whether there's been sufficient work done and 



 

 

homework done and examination of the books been done relative to the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . If they gave it their seal of approval, had all the 
questions that they need to have answered, wouldn't that be a reasonable 
test of the fact that the homework has been done and investors could invest 
in this project with confidence, knowing full well that their interests 
have been protected and all the hard questions have been asked? 
 
Now it seems to me that's a pretty prestigious organization in North 
America, the U.S. Securities Commission.  Why I use that example, Mr. 
Chairman, is that Saferco had to borrow money to build the fertilizer 
plant.  They borrowed it in the U.S. market.  One of the reasons is because 
the fertilizer will be sold in the U.S. market, and you can get a natural 
hedge on your price, your interest rates, and your capital cost, Mr. 
Chairman.  They went into the market and of course they had to file a 
prospectus that has to meet with the approval of the U.S. Securities 
Commission. 
 
You see they talk about the books not being opened and the data not being 
available and the details of the deal not being there and how do we know if 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan -- the guys who are putting up the cash -- 
are really getting the answers. 
 
Well these people here also have those same questions needing to be 
answered on behalf of bondholders, Mr. Chairman, and that's why you have 
securities commissions, to act as the asker of the tough questions and the 
protector of . . . and protect the investor.  Now I think that's a pretty 
prestigious, well renowned outfit, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now I'll bet you, Mr. Chairman -- because I know some of the media haven't 
-- I'll bet you the Leader of the Opposition has never opened this.  In 
fact, Mr. Chairman, I invite the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of 
the Opposition to stand in his place and say he has gone through these 
books and that after going through these books, he still wasn't satisfied.  
If he will say that, then I accept the fact that he doesn't accept the U.S. 
Securities Commission.  But I will bet that he can't stand this moment and 
say he's even paged this book open.  And I challenge him to say so.  I 
challenge him to tell us whether he's even looked at it.  And if he has 
not, I will be happy to send this copy over to him.  Because you see, Mr. 
Chairman, if he has not, how can he . . . it's that old thing, intellectual 
dishonesty or honesty.  How can he honestly say that he hasn't seen the 
facts, Mr. Chairman, if he hasn't taken the time to read what is available, 
Mr. Chairman?  How can he say that? 
 
And that brings me to a final point, Mr. Chairman, on this whole question 
of . . . You know, part of his game plan is, I repeal the tax, okay, and 
then I say . . . and he went on to talk about a game plan, never did lay it 
out.  And then he says, you know, I want to get the books open.  Well like 
I said earlier, I doubt that he's even read this one, and I sent it over to 
him so now he can read it, okay. 
 
He says, open the books.  Well open the books, Mr. Chairman.  And I think 
what he's trying to suggest is that if we get these private guys, whoever 
they are -- they're always against private guys, but anyways, private guys 



 

 

-- he says, I think the numbers will actually be worse than they're telling 
us.  Well I'll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, he can get started any time. 
 
I mean we got $5 billion in one place and $13.1 billion worth of debt on 
the Crown side.  I mean how big does the number have to get before he's 
going to come up with his game plan?  He thinks it's bigger. 
 
I say, the audited numbers, the projected numbers, the estimated numbers 
are $5 billion roughly on the consolidated side of government.  How big 
does the number have to get before you actually start doing something?  The 
books are open, Mr. Chairman, the books are open, and they show the debt of 
the province of Saskatchewan and it is sizeable. And that's why we've put 
in place a six-point plan to deal with it. 
 
I say to him, the books are open, the numbers are there.  How much bigger 
does it have to get before you'll do something about it, Mr. Chairman?  
It's not a question of opening the books. The trick is to do something 
about it, Mr. Chairman.  And we hear nothing from the opposition on that 
point, Mr. Chairman, nothing at all but the old, tired, worn-out stuff 
about paper and advertising and those kinds of things, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Well I want to come back and make a final point about harmonization.  And 
even if you don't accept, Mr. Chairman, the government's analysis of what 
ought to be done, I say what about these people?  If you don't accept this 
Minister of Finance, this government's analysis of the situation because we 
say harmonize, then I want him to tell me, what does he say to the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business, to that organization. 
 
What does he say to the Society of Management Accountants, the Consumers' 
Association of Canada, the president of Ipsco, the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants, Producers Pipeline, the Regina Chamber of Commerce, the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the home builders, the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, Sask Sport Inc., the Western Canadian Wheat Growers, the 
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. 
 
What does he say to these people who sat diligently and tirelessly for a 
couple of months last year as an expert committee relative to the GST and 
harmonization, Mr. Speaker.  And their first and foremost recommendation 
was to harmonize. 
 
In this report the committee recommends the following: first bullet, Mr. 
Chairman, harmonization.  The committee recommends first and foremost that 
the government of Saskatchewan endeavour to participate in a joint 
federal-provincial sales tax as soon as possible with the objective of full 
integration by 1992 or earlier.  That is their first and foremost 
recommendation. 
 
Now even if you don't like our view, our analysis, what do you say to these 
people?  Well I'll tell you what he said, Mr. Chairman, last fall when we 
were long ways from an election.  Okay?  And we didn't have an election and 
we weren't in the heat of an election campaign, an election that we know is 
imminent, when more cooler heads and reasoned minds in the opposition were 
prevailing.  His Finance critic and indeed the Leader of the Opposition put 



 

 

out a press release saying, adopt this report that these experts served on 
that said harmonize.  They said, adopt your own committee's report. 
 
Well have we harmonized, Mr. Chairman?  And are we proposing to do it in 
two stages? And the answer is yes.  Now how is it that that recommendation 
was good in October, but today in the heat of an election it's not.  Well 
I've told you why earlier, Mr. Chairman.  And the reason is because his 
political well-being, he's putting it ahead of the interest of the public 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
He checked the water, he checked the polls, he checked the TV cameras and 
said it sounds better and it looks better on TV to say: I'm against the tax 
and I'll roll it back, so that's what I'll say.  Never mind whether we'll 
put the kids another $125 million in hock, never mind where I'll come up 
with the money for the farm programs.  He said, it makes good TV and that's 
all that counts. 
 
Well I said yesterday in this legislature, Mr. Chairman, and I say again 
today, if that's all it's come down to, if that's all it comes down to as 
to why you are here and why I am here and why he is here and why our 
Premier is here, I say we don't want to be here.  I say we are prepared to 
take the tough decisions on.  I say we're prepared to take the challenges 
on and we know the decisions are not easy.  We're not going to try and 
sugar-coat the realities, Mr. Chairman.  We're not going to try and kid the 
public, Mr. Chairman.  We know there are real problems. 
 
This member here, this Leader of the Opposition went on for nearly an hour 
this afternoon.  And did he mention once how he is going to deal with the 
implications of a 61-year low price of wheat and what it does to our 
economy?  Did he mention the word wheat once?  Did he mention the 
devastation that is occurring across the municipalities where these farm 
families live and the hurt in those communities? 
 
Mr. Chairman, no question about it.  When you get into a decentralization 
process like we are in to stabilize the economy, families are faced with 
major decisions, and it's not easy. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Chairman, this is not a question of dividing the 
hurt.  The reality is we have hurt all across this province in terms of our 
farm families and what's going on in our rural communities, Mr. Chairman.  
How is it that he can speak for 50 minutes, Mr. Chairman, and not once 
address that? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't think the public will be deluded.  I don't 
think they'll be deluded at all.  He, Mr. Chairman, knows the problems are 
out there and they're big. But the course he has chosen, Linus has told 
Charlie Brown there's no problem too big that you can't run away from, and 
he has chosen to run away from it. 
 
And the people will find him out because I tell you what, you can run but 
you can't hide.  Sooner or later you're going to have to come clean with 
the public and tell them where you're going to get the money from, Mr. 
Chairman. 



 

 

 
(1445) 
 
That's the old style politics.  That's the politics of the '60s and the 
'70s. It is not the politics of our Premier; it's not the politics of the 
members of his cabinet, and it's not the politics of our caucus, Mr. 
Chairman.  It may be your politics, Mr. Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Say anything, anywhere, any time, for the vote and so long as it looks good 
for the TV camera and sounds good, that's what you say and that's what you 
do.  If it makes to say in Harris, Saskatchewan, one thing, and contradict 
yourself at the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour Congress with Barb Byers 
standing by your side, he'll say it.  I mean they pull the strings and he 
says what it takes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Is that the hallmark of a true leader?  I say it is not, Mr. Chairman.  And 
that really is the issue here.  Leadership in the '90s.  Anybody who thinks 
these issues and solutions are simple is wrong, Mr. Chairman.  They're 
deluding themselves.  They're saying the problem is so big, I'm going to 
run away from it. 
 
Well I'll tell you what they're saying in my riding, Mr. Chairman, as I 
close.  I'll tell you one thing they're saying in my riding.  And I have a 
significant oilfield component in my riding, Mr. Chairman.  And I just 
happened to have a chance to meet with some of them here a couple of nights 
ago. 
 
Do you know what they're saying?  They're saying they hear this Leader of 
the Opposition saying he thought he was going to repeal this tax.  Now they 
know that the challenges are out there, and they understand the farm 
community because they live right next door to them. 
 
And they say, you know, we're a little worried about  
 Dwhere he's going to get the money from if he repeals that tax.  First of 
all he says harmonization is good for our industries, so we're a little 
concerned that he's going to take that away.  That's first and foremost. 
 
But then he says, Mr. Chairman, they say, Mr. Chairman, we've been getting 
very strong signals from the opposition that to elect them will board up 
and close up the oil patch again in Saskatchewan like it was in the '70s.  
And the talk was there again about Bill 42 that I remember well because I 
worked in the oil patch row where I had my clinic in Weyburn. 
 
And they have not forgotten, Mr. Chairman.  They're very nervous, Mr. 
Chairman.  They're nervous. The oil patch is nervous about the increased 
royalty talk that comes from the members of the opposition.  They're 
worried about the talk that we heard last night from one of the Regina 
members. And they're worried about what they hear from the Saskatoon member 
who says the oil companies have had a nice time under the Tories, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Well I say to you, if it isn't income tax, it'll be higher royalties.  Mr. 
Chairman, the reality is there is no magic, as I suggested in my opening 



 

 

statement, when it comes to stabilizing the economy, getting some cash into 
the farm economy, and balancing the books. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have laid out a plan to accomplish those things.  These 
tax changes are a part of it.  We hear nothing but empty rhetoric and 
intellectual dishonesty, and sheer intellectual emptiness from the Leader 
of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Premier, this government, have a plan to help stabilize our economy, 
help revitalize our economy, Mr. Chairman, help or control the deficit, and 
we're going to stick by it.  This Bill is part of that, as difficult as it 
may be, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, it was a pleasure listening to 
it-just-can't-be-done Mr. Minister of Finance, and the argument that I 
can't do it, a confirmation that he can't do it.  There's no doubt about 
that. This Minister of Finance can't do it and the Premier opposite cannot 
do it. 
 
I want to make just a couple of points before I take my place.  The 
Minister of Finance made a great deal about mailing or delivering over to 
us this document with respect to Saferco, which will be a bit of a question 
which I'll be directing to the minister in a moment. 
 
This is the document which he says tells all.  By the way, a document, 
according to this minister's rationalization, which should go to the United 
States Securities Commission, he led us to believe, but somehow that the 
people of Saskatchewan didn't have the right to get that information. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, do you know what this document is?  It's a compilation 
of the last two or three years of budget speeches of the Minister of 
Finance -- exact replication.  I'll even read you the section from the 
March 1990 budget speech where the minister said, enough is enough.  It is 
a compilation of the blue books that the government tables.  That is all it 
is.  There isn't an assessment here by the United States Securities 
Commission.  There is nothing new in this document that hasn't been tabled 
through every budgetary process. 
 
And this minister has the audacity to accuse us of being dishonest by 
representing this as some sort of new information. 
 
I ask the minister to prove me wrong.  You know what I say is the truth.  
You have misled the House.  There is nothing about the Saferco deal, your 
financing, nothing here.  This is a compilation of your budget speeches, 
including the 1991 that said enough is enough, which you broke the promise.  
How dare you misrepresent the legislature this way?  This is shocking.  
Take a look at this. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Have you read it before? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Had I read it before?  Yes, because I had the misfortune of 



 

 

reading every one of your budget speeches before. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But there's more than the budget speech in there. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- More than the budget speeches.  All the callable loans, the 
Minister of Finance says.  Yes, I've read all the callable loans that you 
owe.  But I have nothing here about Saferco and neither does the people of 
Saskatchewan have it.  Nothing.  And you know it. 
 
How dare you do this to the legislature this afternoon?  That's what this 
is.  You've got four or five of your top Finance department officials 
there.  Here's your chance.  Blow me out of the water.  Tell me that what 
I'm saying is wrong. 
 
What an incredible performance, Mr. Minister of Finance.  Can you believe 
that, Mr. Chairman? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Are the words too big? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- No, the words aren't too big.  They weren't too big when I 
read it in 1990 and when I read it in '89.  They're not too big at all.  
But they add naught at all to the argument that I make about the need to 
open the books. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Can't you figure them out? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- We can figure them out all right and what we figured out is 
a debt of $14.1 billion, Mr. Minister of Economic Development. 
 
Now I have another proposition.  And this I'm going to ask the Minister of 
Finance.  I'm going to ask the Minister of Finance to give me an answer on 
this.  The Minister of Finance was challenging me about targeted assistance 
and the global world being countervailable.  You can't have governments in 
there helping industry because the product that those helped-out 
industries, the product that they sell . . . and it would be 
countervailable in other countries -- and then a few minutes later, he 
tabled this so-called Saferco document.  Now this is an industry which this 
government is pumping in $65 million of taxpayers' money plus cash, cash 
plus a loan guarantee of $305 million to an American corporation to produce 
a product which will be competing in the United States. 
 
Is the minister saying that this is not targeted assistance?  I know his 
argument will be: oh well it's equity.  And is the minister more 
importantly saying that somehow his form of assistance can escape American 
scrutiny but other governments' forms of assistance -- perhaps not like 
this because we do not want to follow this pattern -- won't escape 
government American scrutiny? 
 
How do you explain the Saferco operation for goodness sakes, Mr. Minister?  
You challenged me; well I challenge you.  How do you explain your argument 
about free enterprise being free in the whole world when you people are 
backing this thing until your nose bleeds, or excuse me, until our noses 
bleed -- our taxpayers' noses bleed. 



 

 

 
You're backing these people at Cargill right to the very maximum with every 
bit of taxpayers' bucks and you know doggone well what the implications are 
for that and somehow you say he challenges me to give an example -- I give 
you an example; you give me the answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The answer is quite simple, Mr. Chairman.  This 
project and this deal has been put together from day one as a strictly 
commercial deal with no subsidies because from day one, Mr. Chairman, the 
view was that a significant amount of this product would be shipped into 
the U.S., into that market-place, and it was constructed with that in mind 
from day one, as a commercial deal, no subsidies, because we didn't want to 
have any problem shipping into that U.S. market.  That's why, because there 
are no subsidies here, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You see, Mr. Chairman . . . I don't wish to be overly 
personal because I don't want to sink to the level of the Progressive 
Conservatives with respect to negative advertising, and I don't.  And to 
the minister's opposite complaints about, you know, dishonesty and the 
like. 
 
But I mean surely to goodness, Mr. Minister, you could at least give me the 
courtesy and the House the courtesy of saying, when you challenged me, that 
at least one -- I can give you more -- with respect to Cargill and the 
Saferco operation, that your proposition is not supported by what you're 
doing in Cargill.  Your proposition in fact is undermined by what you're 
doing in Cargill. 
 
You know, if I really wanted to be an advocate on his side, I would argue 
that in fact there is some legitimacy to his argument.  I would have 
thought he could have come back to me and defended him that way. 
 
Because what they've done on the Cargill deal has raised great concern in 
the United States about countervail.  He's dead right.  We know about that.  
We know that Senator Tom Daschle, for example, has introduced a Bill to 
amend the Trade Act of 1974 to strengthen the United States' ability to 
respond to foreign trade practices that threaten the United States' 
commerce in the committee of finance.  We know that; I have that right 
here.  And we know that Senator Tom Daschle has identified the Cargill 
cooked-up deal as an example of an unfair trading practice.  So he could 
have used this argument very well to have supported his case. 
 
But he didn't use it.  You know why he didn't use it, because he catches 
himself coming around.  To use that argument "to support" catches himself 
thereby supporting our proposition that this Cargill deal and the total 
secrecy of the documents is so loaded with potential financial obligation 
by the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan that he couldn't admit 
that.  That's why he didn't say that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- The Minister of the Family denies it.  I'll read from a 
Congressional Record of Wednesday, March . . . this, Mr. Chairman, is 
Wednesday, March 13, 1991, the Congressional Record -- Mr. Tom Daschle, 
dealing with unfair trade practices: 
 

 One of the reasons I am proposing this clarification (referring to the 
Bill) is to address a situation that has raised concerns among many people 
in my State and around the country.  The Canadian Provincial Government of 
Saskatchewan has approved plans to enter a joint venture with a Canadian 
company to construct a world-scale nitrogen fertilizer plant.  The 
provincial government is providing significant equity and is guaranteeing 
commercial debt that will account for most of the plant's cost. (Those 
aren't my words; that's Senator Tom Daschle.)  Industry analysts and U.S. 
producers have concluded that this heavily subsidized plant will cause 
serious injury to the United States market. 

 
And he's been joined by Senators Bumpers and Burdick and Burns and Cochran 
and Conrad and Craig and Dixon -- 16 of them in the United States. 
 
But we're on the hook $370 million, and he says to me: where to get the 
money from.  I say to him, why has he got the taxpayers involved in this 
kind of a deal?  Give me an answer to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- You see, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member -- with 
respect -- has not rebutted my original contention here.  He said in his 
remarks today at the outset that he would give targeted assistance to 
business grants alike, Mr. Chairman.  That's what he said. 
 
I said that approach might have worked in the '60s and the '70s -- his era 
-- but in the global economy of today, it does not work, Mr. Chairman.  You 
cannot have targeted assistance.  That's why the Saferco plant is built 
strictly as a commercial deal, no subsidies.  The loan guarantee, Mr. 
Chairman, is being paid for; that's why it is not a subsidy, Mr. Chairman.  
There are no breaks here. 
 
You see the real issue here, Mr. Chairman, number one, is we don't have 
assistance in here -- commercial deal, no subsidies.  His approach would be 
countervailable, Mr. Chairman, would be countervailable. 
 
But you know what the essential problem that the NDP have with this 
project, Mr. Chairman?  You know what the essential problem they have with 
it?  It's got nothing to do with whether we should diversify the economy or 
restructure the deal this way or that way.  You know what the problem with 
the deal is that that member and all those other '60s members have, Mr. 
Chairman?  You know why they're against it?  Because it's Cargill.  And 
what is Cargill?  It's a U.S. based, multinational, vertically integrated 
company; hence it is bad.  They are totally against us -- nothing to do 
with the project -- because their ideology cannot let them be in favour of 
doing a deal with Cargill, Mr. Chairman.  They are ideologically hidebound, 



 

 

and it's going to keep them held back into the '60s and '70s, Mr. Chairman, 
if they keep thinking that way.  That is the essential objection that those 
ideologues over there have with this, Mr. Chairman.  That's the problem 
they have with the deal.  Nothing else. Nothing more. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if anything is confirmed in this debate 
is the I-can't-do-it mentality proven again by the Minister of Finance and 
the PCs.  You're right; they cannot do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- They couldn't do it in Supercart; no, I can't do it.  
Couldn't do it in Joytec; no, can't do it.  Couldn't do it in GigaText; no, 
can't do it.  These modern-day people, these modern-day economic wizards, 
these global economists -- they say you can't have targeted . . . 
 
Get the logic of this, Mr. Chairman -- $65 million outright cash of your 
taxpayers' money to Cargill, a loan guarantee of $305 million of which 
we're exclusively on the hook, and this minister's got the audacity of 
saying that that's not targeted aid and that's consistent with the 1991 . . 
. not withstanding the fact that the American senators, by the way, support 
his argument that there's a problem. 
 
Is this competence?  Mr. Chairman, I tell you, this argument . . . I'm 
going to withdraw from this debate for one other reason.  My colleagues 
want to get into it, but I also, as you might tell, have a sore throat 
today.  That's maybe good news for you, Mr. Chairman, and the members 
opposite, but I'm running out of my capacity to speak here.  But I want to 
tell you, Mr. Chairman, I couldn't believe the argument about displacement.  
I mean, I want the journalists to look at this.  I'm going to make copies 
of this available to journalists because this was an out and out, flat out, 
misrepresentation by the Minister of Finance this afternoon -- out and out. 
 
And secondly, since he simply fobs over . . . he's caught, you see, between 
-- as they say in the vernacular -- a rock and a hard place.  On the one 
hand, he wants to make the point against me that you cannot have targeted 
aid, but he does not on the other hand want to admit that the United States 
Congress says that there is targeted aid on the Cargill operation because 
that would make our point about it being a problematic situation.  You see 
he's trapped. 
 
And I simply want to close my intervention in this Committee of the Whole 
by saying that this example by the Minister of Finance's own offering, 
makes the point about the new '90s which is required; why this old, 
incompetent bunch is done; why we need to have a new approach. 
 
And what is the first step in the new approach?  A new government's going 
to open the books.  All of these deals are going to see the light of day.  
We're going to open the books and we're going to find money and we're going 
to stimulate the economy and we're going to give assistance to Main Street, 
not to the big-time boys from the United States.  Not to those, but to our 
entrepreneurs, our business community. 
 



 

 

That's the direction, that was my message, and that's why this tax is 
unneeded.  This tax is needed because of the boondoggles like GigaText and 
Joytec and Supercart and the Cargill and the other deals -- the 
Weyerhaeuser deals.  That's what we're paying for.  That's what we're 
paying for.  Don't be mistaken otherwise, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We're committed to the payment of the GRIP and financing of the GRIP 
portions of it.  But I'll tell you we're not going to go back to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan and say to them that $4.5 billion is not enough.  
We're going to find it.  And that's why they are so bitterly personal 
because they know where the money is to be found. 
 
Each one of them is sitting on a powder keg of an issue about ready to 
explode in their departments, and they are just frantically hoping that 
they can keep that powder lid on before the election takes place.  They 
know where the powder kegs are and we know where many of them are, too. 
 
We'll open up the books; we'll cut the waste and the mismanagement; we'll 
give confidence to the business community again.  And I tell you this 
province of Saskatchewan is going to grow as it once did before this bunch 
took office.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Chairman, this Minister of Finance has shown us this 
afternoon the absolute depths of his waste and mismanagement.  And I say 
that a New Democratic government is going to get to the bottom of this.  He 
made light of waste and mismanagement earlier, but we're going to peel it 
away layer by layer by layer.  He's up to his ears in waste and 
mismanagement and it's going to be uncovered and the people of Saskatchewan 
will know where their taxpayers' dollars have been wasted. 
 
I've heard this minister talk about intellectual dishonesty, and I must say 
that he himself is a walking, talking example of dishonesty both 
intellectually, morally, and every other form that's possible for 
dishonesty to take. 
 
What we've heard this afternoon has been shocking.  Mr. Minister, I want to 
turn to an area that's particularly important to me as critic for seniors' 
issues.  This week your government has declared Seniors' Week and this 
should be a time when we take a moment to honour the people who built this 
province, whose tax dollars have been at work over many, many years 
creating our hospitals, our schools, our highways, and our farm support 
programs. 
 
But instead of honouring seniors, this minister and this government 
opposite, have chosen to gouge each one of them an extra $440 per year with 
this new provincial GST. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you may not recognize it, but I want to remind you that 
a great many seniors in the province of Saskatchewan have to survive on a 
fixed income.  Unlike your government, they have to learn to budget their 
money.  They are concerned about deficits.  They cannot live with deficits.  



 

 

They don't like the provincial government's deficit.  But they have to live 
on very low incomes and they have to balance their budgets.  They have to 
budget carefully. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you:  what do you propose the seniors give up 
from their budgets in order to cover the provincial GST?  Should they cut 
back on food?  Should they cut back on medication?  Should they cut back on 
home heating?  Why do you want to gouge them so heartlessly, and just what 
is it that they should give up, Mr. Minister of Finance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as it relates to seniors and how 
government can help, especially those who are perhaps on lower and more 
modest incomes, cope with living expenses, etc., Mr. Chairman, I think the 
points that would be relevant here for the member, in terms of what our 
government is doing to help provide for those categories especially, is: 
number one, the $36 million roughly, I think it is, for the heritage rebate 
program for recognizing those seniors, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Number two isn't maybe very much more specifically as some several millions 
of dollars that accrues to seniors through the low income tax reduction, 
Mr. Chairman.  And there's the seniors income program and of course 
subsidies, home subsidies through Sask Housing and those kinds of things, 
Mr. Chairman.  So those would be three or four examples of how we're trying 
to help seniors there, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, your budget this year has a $1.5 million cut in 
the heritage grant program, a 25 per cent cut in the Saskatchewan Income 
Plan which was established to help the lowest income seniors, a program 
which your government promised to increase every year and then broke that 
promise.  Increased it once some years ago and hasn't increased it since.  
Where they were promised an increase this year and instead of that you cut 
the budget by 25 per cent. 
 
The Minister of Seniors did not speak to this Bill.  He had nothing to say 
on behalf of seniors.  And the only provision your tax Bill makes to the 
reality that many people in our society do not have a lot of disposable 
income, is your tax credit for low income families. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about reality, but the reality is that your 
government does not provide a tax credit for seniors.  It only pays out in 
accordance with the number of dependent children that family has, and most 
seniors do not have dependent children.  Yet many of them have an income 
that's barely adequate or is often inadequate. 
 
So can you explain to the seniors why it is that they are not worthy of any 
special consideration, given their income situation, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only reiterate what I said 
earlier.  I think seniors always, because of the close tie that we've all 
had because of the relative newness of a province like Saskatchewan where 
forefathers in my family and many families here settled this province and 
broke the ground some 85 years ago or so -- 1906, 1907 . . . I think all of 
us have a special place in our hearts for making sure our seniors are 



 

 

provided for and well cared for as best we can. 
 
And that's why there are these programs in place like the heritage program; 
seniors income program; the housing subsidies; what we've done in nursing 
homes; the low income tax credit -- those kinds of things.  I think as it 
relates to harmonization, Mr. Chairman, as well that's why, you know, the 
essentials in life are still tax free, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Food, Mr. Chairman, prescription drugs, Mr. Chairman; you know, health and 
education service, Mr. Chairman; long-term rent, Mr. Chairman, is 
essentially tax free.  And I think that's why when you're designing some of 
these things, and why society traditionally here in Canada and Saskatchewan 
has taken that approach, because we do want all to have access to those 
kinds of basics in as large and unhindered way as possible, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Chairman, I can hardly believe my ears.  That this is a 
Minister of Finance who has not given the seniors a tax credit, who stands 
in his seat and says that the essentials are not taxed with the provincial 
sales tax.  Heating is not an essential?  Clothing is not an essential?  
Where are you?  You talk about reality and you haven't got a grasp on it at 
all. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you now to address this question of the 25 per cent 
cut in the Saskatchewan Income Plan.  These are the seniors on the lowest 
income.  They do not get a tax credit with this new Bill and this new tax, 
and yet there's a 25 per cent cut in that program.  Why? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As it relates to the seniors' income program, I think 
in the last nine or ten years the benefits have gone from something in the 
order of $25 a month to now -- and I don't have the precise number -- but I 
think it's somewhere in the area of 70 or $75 per month.  And so I think 
that speaks of the kind of priority we place in that area, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- The question was: why did you cut the budget this year for 
that program by 25 per cent? 
 
You promised earlier this year that that would be an increase to the 
seniors.  The ones on the very basic income, Mr. Minister, for your 
information, get $80 a month from that program as they have for about the 
last four years.  They were promised an increase.  Their costs are going 
up, and with this provincial sales tax their costs are going higher.  And 
you've cut that budget by 25 per cent, and I want an answer on behalf of 
the seniors of this province who make up a larger and growing proportion of 
the population.  Why did you cut that by 25 per cent?  You should know; 
you're the Minister of Finance.  Answer my question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I think, as the hon. member herself has 
said, there's been a significant, large increase there relative to the per 
month benefit.  If there's been any change, Mr. Chairman, it's been as a 
result of the fact that seniors' incomes have grown, and this is an 
income-tested program with changes in pension programs and elsewhere.  And 



 

 

so there's less seniors having to rely on that program, Mr. Chairman, and 
that would be reflected in the bottom-line numbers.  But per individual 
senior citizen, no matter how you cut it, the benefits are up more than 
triple, or more than triple what they were 8, 9 years ago, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, the budget for the Saskatchewan Income Plan has 
gone up steadily until this year, and then a drop of 25 per cent.  And you 
stand in your seat and tell me that that's because within one year a whole 
group of senior citizens have suddenly gotten higher incomes. 
 
You have reflected to me and to my colleagues and to the seniors of this 
province that you haven't any idea how to budget whatsoever.  That you 
could stand and talk in those terms about the lives of the seniors of this 
province who worked for so many years to build this province up and are now 
suffering under the kind of changes and scorched-earth policy that you're 
presenting, can suffer that kind of a cut in one year and you stand here 
and say it's because they've suddenly got larger incomes, that is 
incredible. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Poofonomics! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Poofonomics, my colleague says.  And I won't give you a 
chance to go any further with that kind of poofonomics.  Your answer speaks 
for itself.  You don't understand what you're talking about and you just 
underlined what I said earlier about your intellectual and moral 
dishonesty. 
 
I want to ask you about some more cuts that you've put in your budget 
because of the impact of the GST, and see how you answer these questions, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
This spring your government decided the seniors in nursing homes should pay 
a $50 deductible for prescription drugs plus a 25 per cent dispensing fee.  
A whole new charge on people in nursing homes and it's your government that 
only allows people in nursing homes $100 extra a month for all their needs.  
It's getting less, but the nursing homes are taking them for extra charges, 
and that's the point. 
 
And this government decided that seniors should pay more for home care, 
that chiropody services and hearing aid services should be increased, and 
you even decided that they should pay more to visit our provincial parks.  
And you've already decimated their disposable income and now you want to 
damage it even more with this provincial GST. 
 
And I ask you why are you making the senior citizens of Saskatchewan carry 
the burden for your government's nine years of waste and mismanagement, Mr. 
Minister? Why are you letting the seniors carry it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as it relates to the question on the 
change in the prescription drug plan for those living in nursing homes, 
although it may well be beyond the scope of the clauses in this Bill that 
are here before the committee, and recognizing that, but if it is in order 
I will just say this to it. 



 

 

 
I'm sure the issue could be gone in more detail in the appropriate budget 
estimates debate, Mr. Chairman.  But the question there was fairness, a 
matter of those seniors who lived inside the nursing home versus those who 
lived in their own homes.  And that was the reason it was done for, was 
fairness and equity.  And I think that would be something that the hon. 
member would agree with. 
 
It's well recognized I think, if the member reads in this year's budget 
documents, because of the importance we place on looking after seniors and 
the importance of nursing homes for part of that, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan through our government are providing 21, $22,000 a year per 
senior citizens' nursing home place, per person if you like.  To offset the 
cost of buying that service would probably run 30, $35,000 per place. 
 
So you can see 21 or $22,000 is a substantial help I think for those 
seniors -- per year -- living in those nursing homes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- My final comment, Mr. Minister, is to say that for you to use 
the terms fair and equitable about these kind of charges to the seniors 
that are in nursing homes again displays that you have no concept of what 
the words fair and equitable mean, and no understanding of the amount of 
income that seniors have who are in nursing homes. 
 
They have to pay this new tax on everything that they want to buy out of 
the measly amount of money that you leave them per month to cover all their 
expenses.  And you've heaped on them a $50 deductible for their 
prescription drugs and now they have to pay 25 per cent of the charges of 
all their drugs on top of everything else. 
 
There's nothing fair or equitable about that, Mr. Minister.  And so it 
shows just exactly the kind of government that you've led us to and the 
kind of government that you support -- intellectually dishonest, unfair, 
and inequitable.  And this tax represents more of the same.  And that's why 
the people are opposed to it and that's why they're going to turf you out 
whenever you get the courage to have an election. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairperson.  Mr. Chairperson, we're nearly 
ending this debate on a very historic piece of legislation.  It's historic 
because of the fact that it is the largest tax grab in the history of this 
province, some $440 million per year from taxpayers. 
 
It's historic because it's to pay for a deficit that is unprecedented in 
this province, a deficit that is making it extremely difficult for this 
government to properly operate the affairs of this province. 
 
It's historic, Mr. Chair, because of the fact that the public has spoken 
out loudly and clearly with respect to their opposition to the PC 
government's tax. 
 
What we've seen are some 120,000 petitions tabled in this legislature -- 
another first in the history of this province, Mr. Chair.  And all these 
things are happening because this government is driving this province to 



 

 

the brink of economic ruin and is desperately grasping for some way to make 
the taxpayers pay for its momentous mistakes and mismanagement. 
 
And in the face of that, Mr. Chair, we have the government moving with 
closure to end the debate -- to stop the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan from objecting to their mismanagement and incompetence; 
closure on this debate to muzzle the opposition and stifle debate in the 
legislature. 
 
That's what's taking place here today. And this debate is very near the 
end, at which time the government will ram it through, notwithstanding the 
vast majority of people's opinion and opposition to the tax, 
notwithstanding our opposition to the tax, they will end debate and ram 
this Bill through to insist that the taxpayers of this province pay for 
their mistakes, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Oh they try.  They'll offer another reason or another argument that they 
needed to pay for GRIP and NISA, but everybody knows that's not true.  
Everybody knows it's to pay for their mismanagement.  If we didn't have 
that deficit there, Mr. Speaker, if they had properly managed the affairs 
of this province we would have lots of money for hospitals and GRIP and 
NISA and transition homes and schools in this province, and programs and 
job creation. 
 
But the people of this province are suffering and they're suffering from a 
callous, arrogant government that has mismanaged the economy and has 
mismanaged the affairs of this province.  And they're four years and eight 
months into their mandate -- four years and eight months into their 
mandate.  And they don't have the courage to call an election. 
 
They look for excuses.  Every time they turn around it's another excuse.  
And they change their mind and flip-flop all the time on whether or not 
there's going to be an election or what the ground rules are with respect 
to an election.  And they're doing this because they're running scared and 
they're afraid to go to the people. 
 
This Bill is going to be passed through this legislature without full and 
proper debate, because the government has chosen to muzzle the people and 
to muzzle the opposition.  And they are doing it against the will of the 
people.  The people are opposed to the tax and they're opposed to the 
government's arrogant, ramming practices of forcing this Bill through this 
legislature and on the public. 
 
And so what are they going to do with the money that they receive from this 
tax?  Well let me tell you about some of the things that they've spent our 
hard-earned tax dollars on in the past.  Let me talk about the give-aways 
that were discussed even earlier here this afternoon, the Cargill situation 
for example, that the Minister of Finance got caught on.  Let's talk about 
the GigaText mess the taxpayers paid for in this province.  Let's talk 
about the sweetheart deal for Weyerhaeuser that this government engaged in 
at the expense of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the numerous patronage appointments that we've heard about over and 



 

 

over again that the taxpayers are paying for, and that this government is 
ramming this Bill through in order to obtain revenue to maintain some of 
their patronage appointments, appointments like a former member of this PC 
government -- Graham Taylor in Hong Kong, Bob Andrew in Minneapolis, Paul 
Rousseau in London, Larry Birkbeck's appointment to the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board, Paul Schoenhals at PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), Gordon Dirks, Sid Dutchak, Jack Sandberg and the list goes 
on and on and on -- one patronage appointment after another, Mr. Chair.  
One patronage appointment after the other, by this government.  And they 
are asking for the taxpayers to dish out another $440 million a year -- 
another $440 million a year to pay for these types of wrong-headed 
priorities, for this type of incompetence and mismanagement. 
 
(1530) 
 
And the Minister of Finance says oh, where do you get the mismanagement?  
And he starts going through his little list and says that only adds up to X 
number of dollars and it's not going to pay for what the NDP want to do.  
What he fails to take into consideration is the millions and millions and 
millions of dollars that taxpayers have to dish out, that taxpayers have to 
dish out and that result from wrong decisions and wrong-headed priorities. 
 
Waste and mismanagement isn't simply advertising.  It isn't simply travel 
-- out-of-province travel at exorbitant rates.  Of course it's those too.  
But it's also wrong-headed policies and wrong-headed priorities of 
favouring and giving, putting us on the hook for huge sums of money with 
respect to Cargill, the attempt to privatize, privatize, and privatize, and 
sell off the future of this province.  And still the deficit rises. 
 
Their policies that have led to this deficit to a tune of virtually $5 
billion, Mr. Deputy Chair, that's the mismanagement we're talking about.  
And if the Minister of Finance attempts to make a small, little, narrow 
argument out of it, it only shows how simply petty one can get in the 
entire debate on the issue. 
 
Let's look at this government's treatment of schools and hospitals in this 
province.  Let's look at its treatment of nurses -- the lay-off of nurses, 
the lay-off of school teachers, the lay-off of highway construction 
workers, the firing of dental therapists.  That has an economic effect on 
this province.  When some 400 dental workers are fired and most of them 
leave the province, it has an effect on the economy and on our small rural 
communities where the majority of these dental therapists live.  It has an 
enormous and substantial effect. 
 
And this government in the last nine years has involved itself in policies 
that have cut back on jobs in rural Saskatchewan and has in this way 
affected the economy of rural Saskatchewan.  And now, faced with all these 
wrong decisions that they've made, they see themselves in a desperate 
situation, a situation where they need more money to pay for their 
mistakes.  And so they're going to the taxpayer. 
 
And they're doing this in spite of the fact the Minister of Finance said a 
year ago the people are fed up with high taxes; enough is enough.  And he 



 

 

has the nerve to stand there and say that the NDP changes its mind.  Well I 
would say that that is a very, very major flip-flop on the part of the 
Minister of Finance.  Enough is enough.  And a year later we see him 
levying on the heads of taxpayers in this province the hugest tax grab in 
the history of this province.  Well I say, Mr. Chair, enough is enough.  
And the people of this province have had enough of this government. 
 
And we see a continuation of these wrong-headed policies of privatization 
and cut-backs and firing of people out in rural Saskatchewan and urban 
Saskatchewan, of patronage appointments and silly, hare-brained schemes 
like GigaText.  And we see continued policies such as these.  And that is 
the heartless and cruel way in which this government is proceeding with its 
policy of decentralization. 
 
Without a plan and without a vision, it is proceeding with this election 
ploy because that's all that it is.  It isn't anything that's been well 
thought out.  It isn't anything that's been planned.  It's an election ploy 
at the expense of the taxpayers.  An election ploy. 
 
Go to the people with your plan, Mr. Minister.  Go to the people with your 
plan in an election instead of putting the taxpayers in hocks for tens of 
millions of dollars because of yet another wrong-headed decision that is 
made without any vision and without any planning. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, there is a list, item after item of 
waste and mismanagement.  I have a list here of 50 ways they waste your 
money.  And I'm not going to go into the details of it but let me tell you 
that it's not simply a matter of talking about air fare and the cost of 
furniture and GigaText. 
 
It's not simply a matter of talking about those specific items.  It's a 
matter of talking about wrong priorities and wrong policies and how 
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars have been wasted 
in this province because every time this government turned around it had no 
plan and no vision and made wrong decisions that were made to benefit their 
friends, their Tory friends, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
And I say, stop the waste and mismanagement.  Stop the wrong-headed 
decisions and the misplaced priorities before you go to the taxpayers for 
more money to pay for more hare-brained schemes, Mr. Minister.  Clean up 
your own house before you go to the families of this province for how many 
more hundreds of dollars every year to pay for your hare-brained schemes 
and mismanagement. 
 
You have no right to implement this tax -- no right.  And when you're four 
years and eight months into your mandate, you have no right, Mr. Minister, 
and your obligation is to put this forward as a proposal and call an 
election and let the electorate decide. 
 
But no.  The government doesn't have the courage to go to the people.  And 
we witnessed that last night.  The government doesn't have the courage to 
put this Bill before the electorate.  They don't even have the courage to 
talk to their own employees, who incidentally, Mr. Deputy Chair, are 



 

 

taxpayers in this province and who will have to pay under this new tax of 
the Tories, and who pay their salaries as well as . . . along with all the 
other taxpayers in this province. 
 
They don't even have the courage to go to the people of Saskatchewan who 
pay their salaries and talk to them about why they are doing certain 
things.  And do you know why they don't have the courage?  It's because 
they can't look them in the eye and tell them -- we believe in what we are 
doing, that it's not an election gimmick, that our decisions were right, 
and that there wasn't any mismanagement, because they can't look them in 
the eye, Mr. Deputy Chair, and hold their heads up.  They can't.  And 
that's why they're afraid to go to the people, that's why they're afraid. 
 
They're fearful of the people and very uncaring because their policies are 
destroying lives.  Their policies . . . And I'm not overstating the case.  
I am flooded with phone calls as an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from people whose lives are being destroyed today because this 
government has no plan and no vision, but is engaged in another election 
gimmick that I say it has an obligation to go to the public about. But it's 
scared to. 
 
And yet it persists on this path of destroying lives -- children crying, 
women crying to me on the phone.  And I'm telling you, Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
have never in my life seen such callous, uncaring attitude as this 
government as they sit in their seats and smirk and shut doors and refuse 
to talk to people face to face and look them in their eyes, and yet are 
bent on their policies of destruction. 
 
And this tax, Mr. Deputy Chair, is another aspect.  And the way in which 
they're trying to push it through this legislature is another aspect, Mr. 
Chair, of how callous and out of touch this government is.  They are 
prepared to further destroy the economy in this province through the 
implementation of this tax. 
 
And we've heard a lot here in this debate today and in preceding days about 
how this tax . . . and the very substantial effect it's going to have on 
our economy.  It's going to cost us jobs. 
 
Oh I know the Minister of Finance will say something else and come up with 
his foolish answers. But let me tell you, the people don't believe them.  
The people tell me -- they are out on the streets of Regina and in rural 
Saskatchewan -- they know this tax is going to drive more people out of 
this province because it's going to cost jobs and because it already has 
cost jobs.  And it's costing jobs, Mr. Deputy Chair, particularly in the 
retail, restaurant, and tourist industries. 
 
It's going to drive businesses into bankruptcy, Mr. Deputy Chair.  It'll 
drive businesses into bankruptcy.  And that's what the business community 
is saying, Mr. Deputy Chair.  It's going to have a devastating effect on 
business.  In communities near Alberta and near the U.S. border, what was 
it?  Some 800 cars a day going south of the border near Estevan because of 
the goods and services tax. 
 



 

 

There's already evidence on the record, before this even becomes law, of 
the effect, the devastating effect this tax is going to have on our 
economy.  And to suggest it's going to be a good thing for business is 
ludicrous.  Business people tell me, if consumers aren't going to spend, 
how does that improve my business opportunities? 
 
If people lose jobs over this tax, how does that improve Main Street, 
Saskatchewan?  Well it obviously doesn't, Mr. Deputy Chair.  This isn't a 
tax to create jobs.  This isn't a tax to pay for GRIP and NISA.  This isn't 
even a tax to try and reduce the deficit, because they won't use one penny 
of it to reduce the deficit.  They will use it to pay for more hare-brained 
Tory, PC, wrong-headed schemes.  That's what they'll try and use it for. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they won't get a chance to do it.  
Because whether they like it or not, the Lieutenant Governor will have to 
be calling an election pretty soon and we'll be in an election in this 
province.  And when the people do get a chance to vote at the ballot box, 
which they so desperately want to do, Mr. Deputy Chair, this government is 
gone and the tax will be gone with it. 
 
This government has said in the past . . . The Premier, for example, in 
1982, Mr. Deputy Chair, is quoted as saying: the deficits are just a 
deferred tax that must be paid by future generations.  Well that's exactly 
what the Premier and his Tory government have done.  They've created a 
deficit that is going to be paid by future generations.  In other words, 
their mismanagement, their incompetence, their waste, their wrong-headed 
priorities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has virtually ruined the future of our 
children.  That's their legacy to the children of this province.  A future 
of high deficits of the responsibility and weight of trying to provide 
quality life for their own children with a Tory legacy of nine and a half 
years of deficit budgeting.  They have ruined the future of our children.  
And I think they should hang their heads in shame, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
(1545) 
 
I just simply cannot comprehend how these people can get up in the morning 
and look in the mirror because I'm telling you I have never sat here and 
seen such arrogance, such callousness, such false bravado from these 
members opposite as they shout and heckle and carry on over there.  And I 
search the faces, and I try to look for a heart that knows and understands 
how they've devastated families in this province and how they've ruined the 
future of their children.  Sometimes I think I see a glimmer, but I'm never 
sure. 
 
And I'm telling you, Mr. Deputy Chair, if we should have the bad luck -- 
which I know we won't -- of ever having another Tory government in this 
province in the next 30 years, I just hope I'm not around to see it -- to 
put it quite bluntly -- nor my children because this province cannot 
withstand another Tory government and the incompetence and mismanagement 
and patronage and stupidity and wrong priorities that we've seen in the 
last nine and a half years.  We simply cannot take another four years, five 
years of Tory government.  And let me tell you, by far the vast majority of 
people in this province feel exactly the way I do and the way my 



 

 

constituents do. 
 
And the thing that I find of course the most difficult to understand is why 
in nine and a half years they haven't learnt anything, why they haven't 
learnt their lesson.  And what I can't understand is why they don't care.  
Why don't they care?  Are they really that callous?  Are they really that 
callous, Mr. Deputy Chair?  Well I'm telling you, the people of this 
province care.  And the New Democrats care.  And when this government is 
turfed out, I'll tell you what our plan is.  Our plan is to clean up their 
mess.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, as has been well 
referred to by my colleagues, this new tax Bill is going to raise some 440 
million new tax dollars, taking that money away from families, Mr. 
Chairman, money that families don't have. 
 
Families are telling me -- they're obviously not telling the Minister of 
the Family this -- but the families are telling me that they can't afford 
this new tax increase.  They just simply cannot afford it. 
 
They've had some $1,500 for the average family in new taxes from this 
government since 1982; another $2,000 from their federal PC counterparts.  
They just simply cannot afford this new provincial goods and services tax. 
Because one of the reasons is that the federal goods and services tax is 
costing Saskatchewan families, average families, 50 per cent more than the 
federal government said it would cost, the federal Tories said it would 
cost.  And that was no surprise to anybody.  So families are telling me as 
a critic for families, that they cannot afford this tax. 
 
In my riding of Saskatoon Eastview I have a high number, a very high 
number, of senior citizens.  And the Minister of Education, knowing 
Saskatoon, would know that.  I've a very high number of seniors in my 
riding. 
 
Now the Minister of the Family is also the minister responsible for 
seniors' issues.  For some reason seniors are not telling him that they 
can't absorb, they can't stand this additional tax.  Or at least I assume 
that they're not telling him because he's not spoken on this Bill. 
 
So here's the Minister for the Family who did not speak on this Bill.  I 
mean for the life of me I can't figure out why he  
 Dwouldn't want to justify this Bill, defend it, if it's so good. 
 
The minister did not speak up for Saskatchewan families.  The same 
minister, who's the Minister responsible for Seniors, did not speak up for 
seniors.  We know seniors are opposed to this Bill.  Where on earth was the 
Minister of the Family?  Where on earth was the Minister responsible for 
Seniors? 
 
Now this is the same minister, Mr. Speaker, who is not standing up for 
family small businesses.  I've met with the small family businesses in my 
riding.  They can't absorb this tax either.  Where on earth was the 
Minister of the Family?  He wasn't standing up for small family businesses.  



 

 

That's his responsibility. 
 
This is the same minister who happens to live in the city of Regina, who's 
responsible for the Public Service Commission.  And it's clear by the 
decentralization plans, which are going to continue to cost the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer more money and add to the debt, which has a negative 
impact on families and the lack of services that they'll have in the 
future. 
 
This is the same minister who's responsible for the Public Service 
Commission and did not even have the courage last night to meet the 800 
family members who were out in front of the legislative steps.  This is his 
town.  He's the minister that these people work for and he's not sticking 
up for them as this decentralization sham, this Tory-style decentralization 
plan, wrecks families and tears them apart. 
 
Now this is related to the Bill, Mr. Chairman, because it's this kind of 
waste and mismanagement that makes this Bill necessary, because they're not 
prepared -- it's very clear now -- they're not prepared to look at saving 
money.  They're not prepared to down-size the cabinet.  They're not 
prepared to down-size their 10 legislative secretaries -- 10 legislative 
secretaries.  No other province has 10 legislative secretaries but this 
government, because everybody's getting extra pay for something except one 
person as far as I know.  So this very much relates to the fact that this 
new tax is needed because the government is not prepared to look at where 
they can save money. 
 
And the Minister of the Family, I would suggest, based on what I just said, 
should have his salary reduced because he's not sticking up for the people 
who he's responsible for as the minister of the families and seniors and 
the public servants in this decentralization plan. 
 
And to top it all off, this minister has not even spoken to this Bill to 
defend this tax increase.  He's had a lot to say from his seat and he's 
threatened to get up, but he never had the courage to get up.  On that 
basis he should be resigning, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I want to know from the minister . . . This Minister of the Family is 
getting $90,000 a year, not even spoken on this Bill.  It's his job as the 
Minister of the Family to analyse the impact of government policies on 
families and to advise the government accordingly and to hold them to 
account.  That's what the Bill said when his ministry was established.  In 
that, he has failed miserably because since he has become the minister 
we've gone to the highest rate of family poverty in all of Canada. 
 
This Bill is simply going to add . . . this new tax increase is simply 
going to add to the family poverty and the growing food banks in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, I'd like to ask him what 
advice the Minister of the Family and the Minister of Seniors gave him in 
cabinet when this Bill was being developed.  Did the Minister of the Family 
and the Minister responsible for Seniors issues say that yes, seniors and 



 

 

families can afford to have this new tax increase?  Did he give you that 
advice?  He obviously lost the battle, but did he give you that advice in 
drafting this Bill? 
 
And don't talk to me about rebates to poor families, because we've been 
around that one before.  And I've read your phoney report, so don't bother 
referring to it.  I want to know specifically what advice -- this is a very 
simple question -- what advice did the Minister of the Family and the 
Minister responsible for Seniors give you in developing this new tax Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, the view of this government and all of 
its ministers, whether it be the Minister of the Family or others, is the 
same.  And that is that because wheat is at a 61-year low and because our 
rural economy is faced year after year after year after year with the 
challenges of either trade wars or drought or those kinds of things, and 
because each year we, like farmers, thought next year would be better and 
you'd, you know, buy a little time, act as an economic shock absorber, but 
the reality is that after four or five years we recognized that something 
had to be done. 
 
And what that something was -- or at least one part of it -- was the 
long-term farm programs, to inject that $1.3 billion into our economy 
ultimately over this next 12 months or so.  And we did that and made that 
decision and believe that cash is important to the economy, and that's cash 
that's important to the economy whether you're a senior or anyone else out 
there, because it speaks directly to the health and the vitality of the 
towns, so many of these towns that our seniors live in today. 
 
I dare say that you aren't really familiar with what's going on in rural 
Saskatchewan and the numbers of seniors that live in some of these small 
rural communities.  And if another store or two was to go there, the 
seniors would be the only ones left living in town.  And that's why they 
too, if you go and talk to them, they too would agree just as these 
ministers would agree, that something had to be done to shore up that 
economy. 
 
I know you're against it.  You're against community bonds, you're against 
decentralization, you're against this budget.  They are not.  They are not.  
They have a very good feeling for what's happening on the farms outside 
their towns.  And that's why I say this strategy is important to them and 
it's important to everyone in this province regardless of their age. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 
Chairman, I wanted to ask the minister some questions about the Bill.  
There's something I don't understand. 
 
When the government takes in tax revenue or royalties or revenues from any 
source, it usually goes to one big bank account and then whatever bills 
they have to pay, they take it out of that bank account and they pay it.  
It's just like many families.  Both the husband and wife work and they both 
put the cheques into the same account and then they sort of pay for things 
out of that account. 
 



 

 

The government also sometimes will have something called dedicated funding 
and that is the money that's raised in one way is there to pay for some 
specific purpose.  And for example, I know that the government collects I 
think it's an extra nickel on every pop can, and the extra nickel is put 
into a special account to do with the environment. 
 
And I understand that on fines in the province that there's an extra 5 or 
$10 tacked onto every fine and that extra 5 or $10 goes into a special 
account, not the main account, and that's used for Crimes Compensation.  
And you call that, as I understand it, dedicated funding as opposed to 
general revenues -- moneys that's raised from whether it's personal income 
tax or the fuel tax or sales taxes or oil royalties or money from the 
federal government.  All that money goes into the general government 
account to pay the bills with. 
 
(1600) 
 
And so the reason I'm raising this is that one of my constituents got a 
letter.  And the minister in this letter says that the PC government 
decided to harmonize this provincial sales tax with the federal 
government's goods and services tax in order to achieve a number of 
objectives, the most important of which is the paying for our share of the 
premiums for the gross revenue insurance plan -- it's called GRIP -- and 
the net income stabilization account called NISA.  And these programs will 
protect Saskatchewan farmers, etc., etc. 
 
That was on April 15.  And then a couple of days later in the legislature 
here the minister said, the application of the education and health tax to 
a broader range of goods will also provide the necessary financing for farm 
safety net programs.  And that's the GRIP and NISA programs. 
 
So it's not really clear to me whether this Bill that we have before is 
Bill 61.  And I've read through the whole Bill, and I've checked it all 
over.  And the explanatory notes and . . . Even though the minister is 
saying that all the revenue from this Bill 61, the one that we're debating 
and asking questions about, is supposed to go for these farm safety net 
programs, and I thought then that it was some kind of dedicated funding 
like the 5 cents on pop cans and so on.  There's nothing in the Bill about 
this. 
 
And so I guess the question I have for the minister, is this a matter of 
dedicated funding?  Are all the proceeds that are going to be raised by 
this Bill, are they all slated to go into the GRIP and NISA programs? 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I recognize that I'm not in my own seat.  The minister 
stepped out for reasons that I think we understand.  If you want to give 
two or three minutes, I think he'll be back.  The associate minister 
stepped into this at a rather difficult time.  It may be just as well to 
take two or three minutes until the minister comes back and let him deal 
with the question.  I think he got the import of it before he left, or the 
associate minister can answer it as you see fit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- What we have done here, Mr. Chairman, is we recognize 



 

 

that we needed to get this . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Order, please.  I wonder if we could just bring 
the decorum of the House back to a little higher level and allow the 
minister to answer the question that has been put to him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, relative to GRIP and NISA, the strategy 
there is this -- I think we've articulated it many times -- the reasoning 
here was we needed some cash into the economy as part of a multifaceted 
plan to help stabilize and revitalize the economy.  The first part of that 
plan entailed getting cash into the farmers' hands so it would get into the 
economy, into the cities, into the communities.  That required a new 
generation of farm programs to be put in place.  They are insurance 
programs.  This isn't the old style ad hoc emergency, one-time kind of 
approach that hasn't served either our farmers or our taxpayers well.  We 
now have an insurance program funded by the farmer, the provincial 
government, and the federal government. 
 
To fund our share of the premiums which will this year be estimated at $125 
million in the budget documents, I think, or 126, something in that order, 
Mr. Chairman, what we did is harmonize and then leave the rate at 7 per 
cent.  And in so doing that will generate, as we estimate, about $125 
million this year. 
 
We have, although there is no separate fund per se, we have targeted that 
revenue to paying the premiums that we have to pay to trigger that $1.3 
billion. 
 
What we've additionally said . . . And next year of course we'll know what 
the numbers are better and we'll have exact figures after we see what 
sign-up rates are and the mix of the program on the various farms.  But 
indeed on an annual basis we expect leaving the rate at 7 per cent of the 
full harmonization to bring it to about $180 million.  And if that does 
exceed the premium requirement, Mr. Chairman, what we have said is that we 
will take that incremental revenue and apply it to the debt and deficit, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I thank the minister for that explanation, Mr. 
Chairman.  Well I know what the farm programs are supposed to do, but I'm 
not quite clear now.  He said that there's no separate fund that's being 
set up for the moneys that are coming as a result of this Bill, but the 
moneys will be targeted for the farm safety programs.  And I guess I don't 
understand those financial terms and just how that would work in the 
Department of Finance. 
 
And I wonder if he could explain to us just how this money will be targeted 
for those programs.  Will there be some special accounting mechanism within 
the Department of Finance to follow the funds to make sure that these 
dollars are going to go to the farm programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- So you're saying that these funds are going to be 



 

 

specifically targeted and you're going to follow their trail. Like any 
money that comes that's raised by this, extra money, you're going to follow 
it through the Department of Finance to make sure that these funds go to 
the farm safety net programs, and if so, how do you do that within the 
Department of Finance?  I've spent, like, four or five years on the Public 
Accounts Committee trying to understand how the province's finances work 
and this is the first time I've ever heard of this sort of targeted 
process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- In terms of this is the first time he's ever heard -- 
excuse me, my throat is getting a little raspy, Mr. Chairman -- it's an 
interesting comment for the hon. member to make about the first time he's 
heard about this target approach. 
 
The very Bill we're talking about amending when it first came before this 
legislature, I expect, had similar objectives in mind because it's called 
the education and health sales tax, Mr. Chairman.  And I suspect then the 
idea of the legislators of the day was to take these funds, that the 
revenue that came from this tax and earmark them especially for education 
and health. 
 
The hon. member asked how we know -- and a legitimate enough question.  We 
know what revenue was last year.  We go to a new system.  The difference is 
the change in the base, Mr. Chairman, as it relates to harmonization.  And 
so we'll have a pretty good handle on the revenue gain, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well my sense is, Mr. Minister, that you've been 
trying to put one over on the people of Saskatchewan.  I know that the 
sales tax that we've had is called the education and health tax, even 
though when it was first set up, I believe in the 1940s, it was set up to 
raise money specifically for education and health.  Then they changed it 
and all the money from that has gone into what's called the combined funds, 
which is the big bank account for the government. 
 
In fact your budget this year says that all the sales tax, this E&H tax 
revenue, is going to go into the combined fund.  But yet you're saying to 
people that, no, no, no.  The money from this is going to go into this GRIP 
and NISA program. 
 
Well you know that's not really true, is it?  I mean this money is just 
simply going to go into general revenues, into the combined fund, isn't it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman. I think I'm at risk of being repetitive 
here.  As I said earlier, no special fund . . . we know what we're 
collecting under the old system.  We know what we'll collect under the new 
system.  We estimate $125 million incremental this year under the new 
system.  We estimate the farm Bill to be 125; the two numbers match fairly 
well.  We hope that that's what . . . the estimates will be the reality, 
Mr. Chairman.  But of course they always are just that.  Estimates next 
year, we estimate the number on an annualized basis to be $180 million.  If 
there is incremental revenue, we'll put it against the deficit. 
 
We'll have a better idea then exactly what the cost of the new farm program 



 

 

premiums are because we'll have sign-up rates.  And more importantly I 
guess the mix of what it is that farmers insured on their farms and how 
many acres they insured because you don't have those numbers merely with 
just the sign-up.  So that's the process, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, here you go again.  You and your 
political advisors are trying to put one over on the people of 
Saskatchewan.  In fact all the money from this Bill, as I understand it, 
and getting beyond the double-talk, that all the money is going to go just 
into general revenues. 
 
And the money from this Bill could just as well be going to pay for the 
increased debt payment that we have this year.  It could just as well go to 
pay for the increased expenditures in the Premier's office that we have 
forecast for this year. 
 
The money from this could be used to pay for Graham Taylor's salary in Hong 
Kong, or to Bob Andrew's office expenses in Hong Kong.  The money from this 
Bill, this extra money could be going to pay for those things as well.  
Isn't that true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, we're going to take 
the $125 million roughly incremental revenue, under the new system compared 
to the old system, we earmarked, and flag that money to pay the premiums 
that will . . . I think that's a pretty good investment. By paying $125 in 
insurance premiums will trigger something in the order of $1.3 billion of 
cash in the farm economy.  That's what's going to happen to that money and 
that's the process we're going through, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Can I then ask the minister, if the revenue from the 
sales tax, the extra revenue, is going to pay for the extra expenses of the 
farm program, which revenues are sort of set aside then to pay for the 
extra expenses of the debt payment this year and for the extra expenses of 
the Premier's office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, there is no specific set aside for 
those purposes.  They're part of the bills the government gets and that the 
government will pay, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well there's no special set-aside funds for those but 
there is a special set-aside fund for the GRIP and NISA programs, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, as I mentioned right at the outset, Mr. Chairman, 
we didn't set up a specific fund.  What I said is we'd earmark those funds 
that come in from incremental revenue which are easily identified.  Here's 
what the old system brought in.  Here's what the new system brings in.  
Subtract the two.  The funds are easily earmarked, Mr. Chairman.  And 
that's why we're taking the approach that we are. 
 
 D(1615) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this is like going to the magic 



 

 

show where the magician hopes to put one over on you by, you know, the hand 
is quicker than the eye.  But I tell you, I don't have any more comments 
except to say that the reason that you're going to lose the election is 
that even at this last stage you continue to try and fool people with 
what's really going on. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the money from this Bill, from this sales 
tax, is going to go into your general revenues.  And those general revenues 
will be called upon to pay for GRIP and NISA, to pay for education, health, 
Graham Taylor's office in Hong Kong, Bob Andrew's office, used to pay for 
the debt, used to pay for the extra expenses in the Premier's office.  And 
that's what's going on. 
 
But yet you're trying to tell people that oh no, no.  We need this Bill 
because we need it to pay for the farm programs.  Well that's not true.  In 
fact the money from this Bill is going to go . . . could just as well go to 
pay for the $100 million in waste that we see every year.  This money could 
well go to pay for the high travel expenses that your government has or all 
the unnecessary advertising that your government does. 
 
But you're trying to . . . I think you're trying to be dishonest with the 
people of Saskatchewan.  I tell you the reason you're going to lose the 
election is that even now, even now, you can't come clean and you can't be 
honest with the people as to where this money is going to go to.  You're 
trying to put one over on people about, oh, we need this Bill because the 
money is needed to pay for GRIP and NISA.  Well that's not true.  It's just 
not true.  And you've admitted it here today that it's not true. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, there's some words that we don't use in the legislature 
here, but when you stand here . . . You know, the other day where you say 
that, oh, this money is necessary for financing the farm safety net 
programs, you write to my constituents and say, oh, we need this money for 
the farm safety programs like GRIP and NISA, and you make comment after 
comment that this money is necessary for those farm safety programs. It's 
just not true. 
 
And there's some words we don't use in this legislature, but I'm very 
tempted to use it with you.  And I won't use it but you certainly are 
prevaricating.  I can use that word.  You're prevaricating.  You're not 
telling the truth to the people of Saskatchewan.  And, if for no other 
reason, you're going to get turfed out of office because you just can't 
tell the truth. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  No, it's not over.  
Unfortunately it is going to be over sooner than I think the people of 
Saskatchewan and the members of this House would have liked. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And I want to make some comment on that, but I want to 
ask several questions.  And in the process of asking my questions, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to make a number of points, and the points I want to make 
I'm going to summarize for the purposes of the minister and you, Mr. Chair, 



 

 

and the House. 
 
This debate is more than just a debate about a tax Bill.  This debate is 
about, first of all, it's about a government and a government's arrogance.  
It's about a government that is not interested in the process of 
government, the democratic process.  And it's about a government which has 
developed a policy which I can only define as economic insanity, and I will 
elaborate on that further in a moment.  The other thing that this debate is 
about, Mr. Chairman, it's about leadership.  And in the case of the 
government opposite, the lack of leadership or misguided leadership. 
 
This debate, thirdly, Mr. Chairman, is about two contrasting visions of 
this province and management of government.  And fourthly, Mr. Speaker, 
this debate is about where we are, from the point of view of the fiscal 
position of this province.  It's about where we have been.  It's about what 
has happened in Saskatchewan since 1982.  In other words, where has all the 
money gone?  All of those things plus many others, but I highlight those, 
Mr. Chairman, on what this debate has been all about. 
 
But first of all, let me comment on the first point.  Like the rest of my 
colleagues, I too rise with some extreme and grave disappointment with the 
knowledge that I will not . . . on behalf of the 10,000 or more 
constituents who I represent, although they have strongly said to me I 
should have the time to bring their concerns to the floor of this House 
because the government chose to use closure to make sure that those people 
could not be heard. 
 
I find that extremely distasteful.  I never believed in all the years that 
I've been involved in public life that I'd ever have to stand up in this 
place and see this happen.  I think it's a black day that we are making 
history with here today, Mr. Chairman, because of that. 
 
Now those people I referred to, Mr. Speaker, are people who live in Regina 
North East and they're not any different than people who live in Gull Lake, 
Saskatchewan or Hudson Bay, Saskatchewan -- which is my original home town 
-- or Saskatoon or Ponteix or North Battleford or Meadow Lake or anywhere 
in Saskatchewan.  Those people, Mr. Chairman, are people who work for a 
living.  They struggle to pay the bills by the end of the month, that in 
many cases they have to really tighten up and wait for that pay cheque to 
come at the end of the month so they can start over again in the next 
month. 
 
There are many of those people.  In fact that's probably the majority of 
the people who live in this province.  Those people, Mr. Chairman, in many 
cases . . . and I have visited at the door as I go visit my constituents, 
people who in many cases at the end of the month barely make it in order to 
be able to meet their mortgage and pay their power bill and their light 
bill and get the groceries and buy the necessities for the children. 
 
And I do not exaggerate, Mr. Chairman, but I have in fact visited families 
in my constituency where they have sat down at the kitchen table with me 
and with pencil and paper showed me, on the basis of their monthly income, 
how each month they barely were able to make it and all the things they 



 

 

could not have for the children which the children should have been able to 
have, and then pointed out to me how an additional 7 per cent PST will make 
it impossible for them to get by. 
 
That's the circumstances that this government is creating for thousands of 
people in Saskatchewan.  In fact some of those people, Mr. Chairman, 
because of the impact of this extension of this PST, will not be able to 
meet their mortgages and there's going to be some of them who will have to 
lose their home.  And that is not any way an exaggeration.  That is a fact 
of life.  That is a real fact of life. 
 
Now the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster with his MLA salaries and his 
Legislative Secretary or whips, extra pay duties and all those things that 
the members opposite, all the back-benchers are getting at the taxpayers' 
expense, may think that that doesn't make sense and maybe it doesn't to 
him. 
 
But I'm telling you, Mr. Chairman, for those people in Regina North East 
and anywhere else in Saskatchewan who work for a living on not a very high 
wage, for them this is real, and this hurts.  And the thing that they can't 
understand is when they want an opportunity to say to the Minister of 
Finance and the Premier, the member from Estevan, to explain to them how 
they're going to be affected by this so that the legislature on the 
government side of the House would understand, the government opposite says 
we're not going to give you a chance to do that. 
 
That, Mr. Chairman, is unacceptable.  I object to it.  All the members on 
this side of the House object to it . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Even from one end of this province to the other, all of 
the people of Saskatchewan object to it, Mr. Speaker.  They oppose this 
gouging tax because they can't afford it. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance makes some kind of an argument how somehow it 
is part of this government's economic development strategy.  Well I'm sure 
with that kind of an argument, he must be listening to the election 
planners in Eric Berntson's office and not to the economist in his 
department, because not one of them would give him this kind of advice nor 
would any other economist anywhere in the country who knows what he was 
talking about. 
 
Let me give you this example, Mr. Chairman.  We are undergoing in 
Saskatchewan today as we are across this country, a recession.  It is 
grave.  What's a recession?  It is when consumers spend less.  It is as a 
result of that when the goods and services being bought are not being 
bought at that kind of rate that they need to be, or could have been, or 
were.  And that results, Mr. Chairman, in lay-offs and fewer jobs because 
fewer goods are being manufactured and we have a recession. 
 
What is the government's answer to this?  The government's answer is we're 
going to take another $440 million out of the consumers' pocket so they 



 

 

will spend less.  Now how in Heaven's name can that make economic sense?  
It cannot make any economic sense, and that's why some of the best work 
we've been able to have done for the New Democratic Party caucus shows that 
this tax, Mr. Chairman, will cause the loss of 7,500 jobs in the province 
of Saskatchewan, when we already had a net out-migration in the last 
several years of almost 90,000 young people. 
 
And the Premier and the Minister of Finance in some strange, perverted way 
yet can still stand in the House and call this an economic development 
strategy.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't buy that.  The people of Regina 
North East don't buy that.  And for the information of the member from 
Wilkie, the people of Saskatchewan don't buy that.  If the people of 
Saskatchewan were buying that, Mr. Member from Wilkie, and Mr. Chairman, 
I'm sure that the Premier's standing in the polls would have been more than 
third place at -- whatever it was -- 16 per cent or 17 per cent.  Those 
statistics should tell that Premier, the member from Estevan, and the 
Minister of Finance that they're wrong. 
 
Well do they listen?  Well of course they don't listen.  And when the 
people come here with petitions and send their members here to speak on 
their behalf, the Premier and the Minister of Finance and the member from 
Regina South and the House Leader, the member for Melfort, say you have no 
right to talk to us. 
 
Last night we had people who came here as well.  And last night we had 
people came here as well.  They're concerned about this gouge tax.  They're 
also concerned about the fact that the government is disintegrating 
government services and ruining families and hurting children.  And when we 
ask the Minister of the Family about where does he stand on this 
devastation that this government is wreaking on families who've been 
affected by this, the minister wouldn't get up in his chair and answer the 
question.  He hid behind his desk, and he had the deputy leader get up and 
defend it. 
 
I'm telling you, Mr. Chairman, I never believed that I would see the day 
when there would be a government -- and I don't care what political stripe 
it is -- I never thought I would see the day when I would find a government 
that would be so callous, so uncaring, so simply politically motivated that 
it would deliberately go out and hurt people the way this government 
deliberately goes out and hurts people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And I don't say that lightly, Mr. Chairman.  I don't 
say that lightly because that is no way for any government to function or 
operate.  The member from Kelsey-Tisdale sits in his seat, and it's not 
even his and he talks about not caring.  Well I'll tell you, the member 
from Kelsey-Tisdale when he talks about not caring should talk about the 
600 jobs that have been lost in Hudson Bay because of his and his 
government's inaction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

(1630) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Six hundred jobs.  He should talk about the people in 
Hudson Bay who he knows and who I know personally, whose unemployment 
insurance is running out at the end of this month.  And this government has 
been sitting on their hands not dealing with the forest industry and 
announcing the policy that will get that forest industry going again so 
that those people can feed their children.  And the member from 
Kelsey-Tisdale laughs about that.  And I say to him, shame on you because 
all that is, is a reflection of the bigger picture about the attitude and 
the approach of this government. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the other point I want to make is that this debate is 
about leadership, and leadership, Mr. Chairman, is doing the right thing 
when you have the mandate to do it.  Well what are some of the right 
things?  One of the right things, Mr. Chairman, would have been not to 
leave 40,000 people unrepresented in this legislature for two sessions.  We 
didn't have the leadership from that Premier.  And he has said to four 
constituencies, we're going to pass a $440 million tax Bill, but you people 
in Kindersley and Indian Head-Wolseley and the other two constituencies -- 
some 40,000 strong -- you're not going to be represented.  That's not 
leadership; that's not leadership. 
 
We are now in the fifth year, in the eighth month of the fifth year of the 
term of this government, long beyond its mandate, and this government has 
no right or mandate to implement this kind of a measure.  But yet they go 
ahead and do it.  That's not leadership. 
 
Government is at 19 per cent in the polls.  The people are saying to this 
government: you have no mandate.  And it bowls ahead and brings in closure 
to force this Bill through.  Mr. Chairman, on the part of that Premier over 
there, that's not leadership; that's arrogance.  That's fear.  That's 
saying to the people of Saskatchewan, I don't care about you.  That's not 
leadership.  That's cowardice, Mr. Chairman.  That's downright cowardice. 
 
And when the people come to this Legislative Building either through 
petitions or in person and want to talk to that Premier about their 
concern, he hides in the members' lounge on the government side of the 
House and will not come out and talk to them.  That is not leadership.  
That's cowardice. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier is so discredited, he has so lost the respect of 
the people of Saskatchewan that he has no right to bring this form of 
legislation and pass it at this time.  He should call an election so that 
the people can tell him whether that's the kind of thing he should do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now is it because he has come around the corner and saw 
the light?  Is it a consistent position that this Premier has taken on this 
tax Bill?  Well let's examine that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I'm just going to read from headlines of various newspaper stories, and 



 

 

here's what they say.  And because I'm reading, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to 
read names because I'm reading from the newspaper articles. 
 
One headline:  Devine considering a value added tax.  Then: Wilson says GST 
a certainty.  And what does then the Premier do?  Because he's in the 
pocket of Mr. Mulroney, he changes to some degree and he seemed to come 
stronger now.  He says: Devine stands ground in support of sales tax.  This 
is talking about the GST. 
 
And then he came along and he said:  Devine hints at food tax.  But 
something along the way said that the Premier was thinking about having an 
election in 1990, and we began to hear him say things, oh but that GST 
isn't so good.  And it was reinforced by the Minister of Finance in 1990 
who read in his budget that there would never be a GST in Saskatchewan. 
 
But yet today we're considering a Bill that will impose a provincial GST, 
Mr. Chairman.  That is not leadership.  That's deceit.  And the people of 
Saskatchewan have been deceived.  And they won't even be given the chance 
to say what they want to say about it, because the government has brought 
in closure and won't allow them to speak. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Chairman, this debate is about vision.  Well what are the 
visions for the '90s?  Well first of all, how are we going to -- in this 
case because I'm going to talk about the tax Bill, I'm going to stick to 
this -- how are we going to manage things in the '90s?  Well all of my 
colleagues have already said -- and I can't say it better than them -- we 
need to do away with the waste and the mismanagement and even the 
corruption which has brought us from a surplus of $139 million in 1982 to 
an accumulated deficit of $5.2 billion in nine short years.  Do away with 
the waste and mismanagement. 
 
Look at the tax system so that it is implemented on the basis of fairness 
and ability to pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Rejuvenate, rejuvenate our economy, Mr. Speaker.  
Rejuvenate our economy and create jobs using the strengths in Saskatchewan 
instead of relying on the Pocklingtons and the Cargills and those that come 
in here and do it for us, because that has created practically nothing from 
the point of view of jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to the Premier, if you've got $60 million to spend -- which is what 
you're spending, and that's a conservative figure, excuse the term -- if 
you've got $60 million to spend to ruin people's lives and make children 
unhappy and traumatized with this so-called decentralization, if you've got 
$60 million to do that, put that $60 million into rural economic 
development and you'll create many, many jobs and they will be new jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- What wouldn't have a fraction of the $60 million done 
in Hudson Bay to create new jobs?  Think about it.  What wouldn't a 



 

 

fraction of that done to create new jobs and help to stabilize that 
economy?  Jobs that would be producing things.  That's what has to be done. 
 
What's been the government's vision?  Well it can be capsulized in four 
words.  The government's vision has been privatization.  It's been 
deregulation.  It's been free trade.  And it's been high taxes.  That's 
their vision. 
 
Well, has it brought us results?  Here is the results.  It has brought a 
huge deficit, unfair taxes, high unemployment, lost farms, out-migrations, 
and we have kids who can't go to school because the government does not 
fund our university and technical schools adequately and they have put on 
quotas.  That's the result of this government's vision. 
 
And finally, Mr. Chairman, where has all the money gone?  Well the 
government's own statistics show us some rather interesting information.  
Since 1982 to 1990 government revenues have gone up by 61 per cent.  Now 
that's not a small increase.  It's not as if the government revenues have 
been declining or they've been frozen or they've flattened out.  Government 
revenues since 1982 have increased by 61 per cent.  That's a big increase.  
Inflation has gone up by 48 per cent, so revenues even increased at a 
faster rate than inflation. 
 
But you know, Mr. Chairman, what the expenditures of this government have 
been?  They've gone up by 89 per cent -- 89 per cent.  I say to the 
Minister of Finance, you need money to pay for GRIP and NISA.  You need 
more money to pay for education.  Take a look at where you're spending your 
money and cut out the waste and cut out the mismanagement and you'll find 
the money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As my leader, the member from Riversdale so eloquently 
put it earlier today, the revenues of this government this year will be 
$4.5 billion.  That's what they're going to spend on a province with a 
population of less than one million people.  And if this government can't 
manage well enough to live within that $4.5 billion and within those means, 
then this government should call the election tomorrow.  And we'll start it 
on Monday and they should step aside and let somebody sit on that side of 
the House who can manage that kind of money, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because finally, Mr. Chairman, from the point of view 
of the economy of this province as well as other reasons, from the point of 
view of the economy of this province as well as many other reasons, there 
is nothing that this province needs more than an election. 
 
And I know that some members opposite will say, oh well, you're the 
opposition, of course you'd want an election.  That's not why I say that.  
But . . . don't smile, Mr. Chairman, because I think you should listen to 
what is about to be said, because you should be just as concerned about 
where this province is headed as I am or anybody else in this House.  And 



 

 

you probably are.  I think you are, sir. 
 
We need an election because for a year now in this province some of the 
important economic decisions have not been made.  We have stood still.  We 
have stood still because the government has been preoccupied solely with 
trying to stage an election campaign and time itself for an election, and 
has not made any of the major important and big decisions that we so 
desperately need, that we so desperately need, in order that we could get 
the economy rolling again. 
 
And it's not only just the government, but when the private sector out 
there looks around and knows there's an election coming and does not get 
any clear signals from where the direction of the government is, the 
private sector will say -- and they're saying -- we're going to wait.  
We're not going to make any economic decisions.  We're not going to make a 
decision on investments because we are going to wait for the election to 
take place and then we'll know how we're going to go about doing this. 
 
And every week and every month that this government delays an election our 
economy grinds closer to a halt because of all of this indecisions.  And we 
are in the midst of a recession and we need those decisions to get made so 
that we can create the jobs and create the wealth to get this province 
rolling again. 
 
And instead of seriously considering the implications of their dithering 
about the election, instead of seriously considering their fear of the 
voters, instead of seriously considering what needs to be done, when that 
is an election, the government sits on his hands thinking that each month 
for every one of those members is yet another pay cheque. 
 
And that's about the level of the judgement that's being made over there, 
Mr. Chairman, and I think that that's tragic.  I think that's tragic, 
because there is more to government than that.  There is more to government 
than that.  Government is really the collective will of the people, where 
the people of any society elect people to a legislature to do things for 
them together what they individually cannot do for themselves. 
 
The irony of it is, is that we have a government opposite that only cares 
about themselves personally.  And because of that, Mr. Chairman, our 
economy continues to grind slower and slower and slower.  And more people 
are out-migrating because there are no jobs for them, and more people are 
losing their homes because they're being laid off from their jobs. 
 
And this Bill that we're talking about here today, Mr. Chairman, aggravates 
that situation even more because it is a tax that is going to cause the 
recession to go even deeper.  It is a tax that's going to cause people to 
suffer even more.  It is a tax that is going to eliminate 7,500 jobs when 
we should be trying to create jobs in Saskatchewan.  It is a tax that does 
not have the approval of support of any people anywhere in Saskatchewan.  
It is a tax that is not wanted.  It's not needed, and it should not 
proceed. 
 
I know because the opposition has been restricted with a closure motion, 



 

 

therefore we will not be able to do any more because of the government's 
actions -- at least in this debate.  At least in this debate.  But there is 
something that we will be able to do.  And that's a choice the people will 
make come the next election.  And that is, that if this New Democratic 
Party is elected as the government with the member from Riversdale as the 
premier, at the next election, whenever it's called, this tax is gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This tax is gone.  So, Mr. Chairman, in conclusion I 
simply want to say that this government has failed on all the four counts 
which I have outlined here today.  It has failed on all those four counts, 
and it will continue to fail because right now in the months or weeks ahead 
if it waits that long for an election, it will not think about the interest 
of the province.  But those members opposite will only be preoccupied with 
the interest of the Conservative Party.  And, Mr. Chairman, that's going to 
hurt the province even more. 
 
Now I mentioned earlier about where has all the money gone?  Has it gone to 
help people who need to get health care adequately?  Of course not, because 
there's people in this province not getting adequate health care.  Has it 
gone to provide the best possible education in Saskatchewan?  Of course 
not, because from one end of this province, they're closing rural schools.  
And it's universities and technical schools.  Students have quotas so that 
they cannot get to school even though they're qualified to go. 
 
The government's answer to all of this lack of economic activity is what 
they call decentralization.  But isn't it ironic that in the last few years 
. . . 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Order.  Pursuant to an order of this day, four 
hours was allotted for the committee consideration of Bill 61 and that 15 
minutes before the expiration of that allotted time the chairman is 
required to intervene and put all questions necessary to dispose of every 
section of this Bill. 
 
Three hours and 45 minutes have now expired and I'll put the question on 
clause 1. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to on division. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Call in the members.  There will be a 10-minute bell on 
the vote. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:48 p.m. until 4:58 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 



 

 

 
 Devine Martin t 
 Schmidt Neudorf t 
 Klein Gerich t 
 Hodgins Swenson t 
 McLeod Britton t 
 Lane Sauder t 
 Hepworth Toth t 
 Meiklejohn Duncan t 
 Hardy Gleim t 
 Kopelchuk McLaren t 
 Petersen Baker t 
 Wolfe Muirhead t 
 Martens Johnson t 
 Hopfner Gardner t 
-- 28 R 

Nays 
 
 Romanow Kowalsky t 
 Shillington Solomon t 
 Lingenfelter Atkinson t 
 Tchorzewski Hagel t 
 Thompson Pringle t 
 Brockelbank Calvert t 
 Mitchell Smart t 
 Simard Koenker t 
-- 16 R 
(1700) 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and be passed under its title. 
 
The division bells rang from 5:03 p.m. to 5:10 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Devine Martin t 
 Muller Neudorf t 
 Schmidt Gerich t 
 Klein Swenson t 
 Hodgins Britton t 
 McLeod Sauder t 
 Lane Toth t 
 Hepworth Duncan t 
 Meiklejohn Gleim t 



 

 

 Hardy McLaren t 
 Kopelchuk Baker t 
 Petersen Muirhead t 
 Wolfe Johnson t 
 Martens Gardner t 
 Hopfner t 
-- 29 R 

Nays 
 
 Romanow Kowalsky t 
 Prebble Solomon t 
 Shillington Atkinson t 
 Lingenfelter Anguish t 
 Tchorzewski Hagel t 
 Koskie Pringle t 
 Thompson Calvert t 
 Brockelbank Lautermilch t 
 Mitchell Smart t 
 Upshall Koenker t 
 Simard t 
-- 21 R 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 5:29 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took 
her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the following Bill: 
 

Bill No. 61    -- An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 
(No.2) 

 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 5:31 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:32 p.m. 
 
 


