





























































Hansard: April 29, 1994


 

 

April 29/94 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have with me today a 
number of petitions that have been delivered.  These petitions are from 
actually all across the province and including other provinces in Canada as 
well, and it reads like this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly showeth that the entire process regarding the trials of child sex 
offenders needs review.  Child witnesses require safety and an appropriate 
condition in the courtroom while testifying without question.  Mandatory 
training for judges, lawyers, and investigators is required.  Sex 
offenders are dangerous and should not be released pending appeal.  
Victims' rights through victims' compensation programs should equal those 
offered to the defendants through legal aid; that this has resulted in a 
lack of confidence in the justice system and the judicial process. 

 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly may be 

pleased to cause the government to immediately investigate and offer 
changes to these failed areas. 

 
 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I at this time present petitions.  Over 7,000 names have been 
signed thus far and they are continuing to come in on a daily basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  It is my pleasure to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, 143 Canadian Automobile Association 
provincial jamboree for school patrollers.  These are the school patrollers 
who assist in getting the students back and forth across busy streets 
safely.  It is my particular pleasure to do this on behalf of the Associate 
Minister of Education who's absent at a family funeral. 
 
As I said there are 143 of them in the Assembly.  The information is not 
complete; I'm not sure who accompanies them here.  I will have an 
opportunity to find that out.  I will be meeting with them at 10:45 to 11 
and I hope the members who are here enjoy today's proceedings and I'll 
really look forward to getting your impressions of what you see when we 
meet at 10:45. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my real pleasure to 
introduce several people who are in your gallery this morning who are on 
their way to Yorkton for the Country Music Association awards night which 
is taking place this evening. 
 
I want to bring to your attention and to the attention of the House, Mr. 
Ralph Emery, radio and television personality and host of Nashville Now, 
which ran for 10 years on The Nashville Network.  And Ralph, I am told -- I 
had a chance to meet with him earlier this morning just for a few minutes 
in my office -- will be receiving the first ever international humanitarian 
award from the Saskatchewan Country Music Association at the fifth annual 
Mikee Awards in Yorkton tonight.  I'd like to ask Ralph to stand. 
 
And also Blake Emmons, Canadian-born entertainer and songwriter, member of 
the Order of Canada and owner of E.I.E. Entertainment in Nashville; and 
Diane Petty, senior vice-president and creator of SESAC, from Nashville as 
well. 
 
I want to express our wish that our guests here will enjoy their stay this 
morning.  And I want to assure them that although sometimes people think of 
this place as a theatre, we don't necessarily always sing from the same 
song sheet. 
 
We wish you the very best in an enjoyable stay in the legislature and 
indeed in Saskatchewan, and I would like to ask all the members of this 
House to extend a warm welcome to our guests here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to 
the House today two friends of mine from the fine community of Hudson Bay, 
Dan and Marie Schultz, who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  If 
they would just stand. 
 
Dan and Marie are very good friends of mine and they're also the mom and 
dad of my ministerial assistant, Lee Schultz.  I would like the House to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure at this 
time to introduce some guests to the Assembly.  These are seven individuals 
who come from the area surrounding Martensville, and they have come to 
Regina this morning because they do have some concerns as well, 
particularly relating around our justice system. And these individuals, Mr. 
Speaker, are Mary Letkeman, Carol Dalton, Debbie Hills, Amanda Hiebert, 
Anna-Marie Walcz-Irwin, Linda Guenther, and Arlene Letkeman. 
 
And I would ask them to stand and be recognized, and would ask all members 
to help me welcome these ladies to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- I hope members will permit the Speaker to join with the 
member from Kelsey-Tisdale to also welcome Marie and Dan here this morning.  
They've been personal friends of mine for the last 40 years, although Marie 
won't admit that, but it's been that long ago.  But I do want to welcome 
you here and hope you have a happy stay in Regina. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Ukrainian Easter (Velykden) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inform the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that this weekend many Canadians of Ukrainian 
descent will be observing the Easter weekend.  Today is actually strasna 
pyatnytsya, which means frightening Friday. And on Sunday, Easter Sunday is 
called Velykden, which translates to: a very significant day. 
 
In the Christian tradition, Mr. Speaker, Easter begins with the Easter 
matins and high mass.  And this often happens very, very early in the 
morning.  After which time the community all exchange warm Easter greetings 
using the traditional greeting, Xyryctoc Voskres, which translates to, 
Christ is Risen!  And the response is Voyeesten Voskres, which means, 
indeed he has risen! 
 
Then people go back home and have their Easter feasts.  After the church 
service, decorated baskets of traditional foods are blessed.  These include 
Easter breads called babka and kolach which are beautifully decorated, as 
well as Easter eggs which are called pysanka and which are essential to the 
Easter celebration.  In many cases the foods are given to friends as a sign 
of affection, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ukrainians in Canada and many other Canadians treasure this practice and 
the practices that are encouraged in Canada, which really makes this a 
wonderful place to live, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that some day everybody in 
the House gets a chance to attend the Ukrainian Easter feast. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Foam Lake Community Hall Fund-raiser 
 
Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to take this time to 
inform the Assembly about the Rider Pride sportsman dinner and dance this 
coming Saturday in Foam Lake which will feature the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders.  The funds from this evening, sponsored by the Foam Lake 
community hall fund-raising committee, will help a badly needed hall for 
the residents of Foam Lake. 
 
Guests will have an opportunity to meet this years Riders, including Miss 
Saskatchewan Roughrider and Gainer the Gopher.  Also in attendance will be 
Coaches Pat Perles, Jim Daley and Richie Hall. 
 
A great dinner will be enjoyed by all who attend as well as a chance to 
dance to the music of Brad V and the Prairie Thunder.  The evening will be 
emceed by the staff of CKRM with lots of fun and door prizes to be won 



 

 

including a voucher pack of 10 Rider home-game tickets.  In addition an 
autographed Tom Burgess jersey will be auctioned off. 
 
Players and coaches of the Riders will be conducting a coaches' clinic 
earlier in the afternoon and an autograph and photo session will be held 
prior to the dinner and dance. 
 
The new Foam Lake community hall, which is presently being constructed, 
will be greatly appreciated by the community.  This beautiful new building 
features a 3,200 square-foot floor that is state-of-the-art and a first in 
Saskatchewan.  What makes this floor unique is that it consists of a 
plywood sub-floor mounted on metal-encased rubber sleepers topped by maple 
hardwood tongue-and-groove flooring. 
 
I would like to urge all of those interested . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Model Parliament 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, even though we leave the House today and 
return to our constituencies for the weekend, our seats in this Chamber 
will not remain empty.  Starting tonight members of the Saskatchewan 
Elocution and Debate Association will gather for the 1994 Historical Model 
Legislature.  The association is a non-profit organization that encourages 
young people to participate in speech and debate tournaments.  The 
association is active at both the University of Regina and the University 
of Saskatchewan, as well with students in grades 6 through 12. 
 
This year the Historical Model Legislature focuses on the period 1922 to 
'29.  Topics to be debated include the Canadian Wheat Board, control and 
suppression of traffic in alcohol, agricultural co-ops, the establishment 
of a Saskatchewan censorship board, and the adjustment of agricultural 
debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many such model parliaments in Saskatchewan which 
help young people learn about politics, history, and how to communicate.  
The funding for such projects comes from Saskatchewan Lotteries' sports, 
culture, and recreation funds, which I believe to be a worthwhile and 
necessary investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would on their behalf thank in advance you, the Speaker, and 
building staff for facilitating use of the Chamber for this weekend.  
Finally, I wish those who take our places for the next few days good luck 
in all their deliberations. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Country Music Awards 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, as a regular attendee at the Big Valley 
Country Music Jamboree, I take great pleasure in looking forward to this 
year's performance and great pleasure today in announcing to the Assembly 
that the Saskatchewan Country Music Association will kick off its awards 
weekend with the fifth annual Mikee Awards Show, featuring 14 of 
Saskatchewan's finest country entertainers at the Anne Portnuff Theatre in 
Yorkton. 
 
The events this weekend, Mr. Speaker, will also include a pancake breakfast 
on Saturday, followed by a round-table discussion on various aspects of the 
country music business featuring, Mr. Speaker, prominently TNN's (The 
Nashville Network) Ralph Emery, with us here this morning; SESAC's Diane 
Petty; Blake Emmons of the E.I.E. Productions; Cindy Painter of CMT; and 
Anjo Wilson, a noted music management specialist from Toronto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will also be this weekend a president's banquet at the 
Agriplex in Yorkton on Saturday evening, followed by a cabaret. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the awards will recognize outstanding achievements in a total 
of 23 categories including performance, production, broadcasting, and 
management.  The award, a clear acrylic obelisk with a golden microphone 
embedment was designed by noted Saskatchewan aboriginal artist Willard 
Ahenakew. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has designated this to be Country Music Week in 
Saskatchewan; a fitting tribute to the people who create our country music 
and to all of us who enjoy it.  Mr. Speaker, country music has always been 
used to chronicle the progress of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Durum Trade War 
 
Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it pleases me to 
take a stand here today to report what should have been obvious to many of 
us already -- that the so-called trade war, the durum debate, is without 
foundation.  In fact the United States Department of Agriculture got a 
rough ride when they faced the International Trade Commission in 
Washington. 
 
They claimed Canadian wheat is flooding the U.S. (United States) market, 
but doesn't seem to have anything to back up the assertion.  And why is 
that?  Because there isn't anything to back it up with.  The good news here 
is that the members of the commission even said their arguments didn't have 
merit.  And I wish to quote: The ITC Commission, David Rohr said the report 
prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture was not very 
convincing.  Rohr said it was more of a political statement.  Some 
tabulations, some statements that did not recommend that you have reached, 
and I consider that a political statement. 
 
The basis of their case appears to be that we are taking markets away from 
them and flooding them with Canadian wheat.  That's not so bad since the 



 

 

quality of product . . . since the American pasta market is crying out for 
our quality durum wheat. 
 
But the key to this argument is the fact that the Americans are shipping so 
much of their own product out of the country -- and heavily subsidized.  It 
has left gaping holes in their own market.  So naturally the pasta makers 
are going to buy Canadian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, frankly we borrow an old phrase, an old phrase righteous on 
this one, Mr. Speaker -- come hell or high water, this one we will win.  
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Recognition of Student 
 
Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like today to inform the 
House that a constituent of mine, Chris Kreutzweiser, has been awarded a 
two-year scholarship for the Lester B. College in B.C. (British Columbia). 
 
The reason I'm mentioning this, Mr. Speaker, today and singling him out is 
because Chris is an outstanding young citizen in this province and is an 
example of the good educational system that we do have in the province. 
 
Chris is the son of a feminist and a community activist in Saskatoon and he 
has learned his lessons well from his parents.  He is a very thoughtful, 
serious, and progressive young man, very concerned about environmental 
issues.  And I have to tell you, he is also extremely concerned about 
political issues.  And I would warn all members of the House that I 
confidently expect that within 10 to 15 years, he will take his place in 
this august Assembly.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Martensville Abuse Case 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to address 
my question to the Minister of Justice, and failing that, to the Premier of 
this province.  And my question is this, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday my 
colleague from Moosomin raised the William Dove case as an example of the 
justice system failing the people of Saskatchewan.  And today, Mr. Speaker, 
I'm bringing forth another example of such an incidence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of people from Martensville and area have travelled 
to Regina today to have a petition presented in this legislature -- a 
petition of over 7,000 names.  And these people are calling for a 
 Dpublic inquiry into the abuse cases that took place in their community. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Martensville and across this province and, 
indeed, across Canada want to know what went wrong with our justice system 
and the way in which these cases are handled.  And I ask you now:  will you 



 

 

hold a public inquiry as these people and people who have signed that 
petition are requesting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member for the 
question.  And I want to say this:  that our government has listened very 
carefully to many citizens in this province, including the individuals who 
are here today.  For too long individuals, agencies, and government 
departments have acted independently of each other when it comes to issues 
of children.  That is why in June, 1993 our government launched the 
children's action plan: an invitation to work together. 
 
We invited people, individuals, non-governmental organizations, community 
agencies, government departments, to come together to put children's issues 
on the public agenda.  In this action plan, we say that adults have a moral 
responsibility to provide the best care possible for their children and 
government has a moral responsibility to provide resources for those 
children. 
 
We have committed over $4.4 million for children's services including a 
child advocate and including assistance for child victims.  We are 
launching a facility that will provide coordinated, multidiscipline 
approaches to child physical and sexual abuse, and we are providing 
$200,000 for the police and social workers to work together in order to 
adequately investigate cases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate that this case does not 
warrant explanation from the Minister of Justice or the Premier, and with 
no disrespect to the Minister of Education, to read a prepared statement to 
this House in response to a very serious question, I think that is letting 
. . . and selling the people of this province somewhat short. 
 
Madam Minister, since you are the one that is going to be answering, I want 
to let you know that people on all sides of this issue are dissatisfied in 
the way in which it was handled, and they are looking for answers.  There 
have been more questions raised in this process than answers that have been 
coming forward. 
 
So I'm saying now that the people are looking to the Minister of Justice 
and to the Premier of this province to investigate this situation and take 
hold of it because they see the fact that the justice system of this 
province has sold them short.  And it is the Minister of Justice of this 
province who is ultimately responsible for the situation and to ensure that 
law and order and justice are carried out. 
 
Now what is going to be happening as far as you and your cabinet is 
concerned then, Madam Minister, as far as making sure, absolutely sure that 
instances like this do not happen again.  What steps is your Premier and 
your Minister of Justice prepared to take? 
 



 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to once again thank the member for the 
question.  We cannot rewrite the past, but we can learn from it and we can 
do things differently.  That is why our government has allocated more than 
$4.4 million in resources for children in this province.  That is why we 
have taken this children's action plan to communities across the province 
to put children's issues on the public agenda.  It is not enough to have 
children's issues on the government agenda; children's issues must be on 
the public's agenda. 
 
We have said in this legislature that we are providing funding for a 
Children's Advocate, something that your government didn't do even though 
you were asked to do so.  There will be a Children's Advocate in this 
province that will advocate on behalf of children.  That is why we are 
bringing police services and social service services and other services 
together, so that we can adequately investigate allegations of child 
physical and sexual abuse.  That is why we are setting up a centre, a 
child-friendly centre, that takes a multidisciplinary approach to this 
issue. 
 
As I have said, individual government departments and agencies have been 
stuck in their boxes for many years.  We have a children's action plan that 
brings those groups together so that they can act responsibly and in a 
collaborative way in order that we can begin to deal . . . and begin to 
right some of the past wrongs, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that the folks from the Martensville 
area did not come here to listen to a diatribe like that.  They are 
concerned enough to come here to the legislature, Madam Minister.  They 
feel that the justice system has failed them and the children of that area, 
and they want to have the assurance that they will be able to speak to the 
chief justice of this province, which is the Minister of Justice, and to 
the Premier. 
 
They've already met with the Prime Minister of this country, they already 
have a commitment to meet with Allan Rock, and what we are asking now is 
that you have the courtesy to extend to them the same opportunity to meet 
with the Minister of Justice, to meet with the Premier today, and make a 
commitment that there will be action taken to investigate what went wrong 
in that abuse case.  They want some real action. 
 
So, Madam Minister -- or perhaps I should direct the question now to the 
Deputy Premier -- sir, will you get to your feet, get involved, and on 
behalf of the Premier make that commitment that indeed, if no one else, you 
will at least meet with these folks today?  Will you do that, Mr. Deputy 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to respond to the 
member from Rosthern.  Members of this government are always willing to 
meet with concerned citizens on issues that they want to speak to the 



 

 

government about. 
 
We have endeavoured to be an open government and give people an opportunity 
to take part in the decisions that are made as part of public policy.  And 
certainly if the people from Martensville want to meet with some 
representatives of the government, the ministers of the government . . . 
The Premier is not here today -- he's in Saskatoon -- and the Minister of 
Justice is not here today.  If they want to wait to meet with them, it will 
have to be on another occasion, but ministers will be available to meet 
with representatives from Martensville if that is their wish. 
 
That is the way we approach these kinds of issues in this government and we 
have done so since November 1, 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Labour Standards Amendments 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Labour.  Mr. Minister, most of the damage that your Labour Standards Act 
will do will only come to the surface when the corresponding regulations 
are tabled. 
 
Not surprisingly you have refused to come forward with those regulations 
because it is your intention, I believe, to do most of that damage through 
the back door, in effect bypassing this Assembly and the public scrutiny 
that goes along with this Assembly, Mr. Minister. 
 
If your Bill will have absolutely no effect on business investment and job 
creation, as you have insisted, Mr. Minister, then why not table at least a 
draft copy of the regulations before this Bill is forced through the House?  
Would you do that, sir; would you at least table a draft copy of the 
regulations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I've said to the members before, repeatedly, that 
the views expressed by those with whom we have met . . . and if this is 
behind closed doors, I would hate to see something which involves intensive 
consultation, because I have met with a fair number of groups who pull us 
in all directions.  So this is a rather extensive behind-doors discussion. 
 
But what we have been told by both sides is that they would prefer that 
their hands not be bound by regulations which are tabled in this Assembly. 
They would prefer to have a freer hand when they meet.  And that is the 
view of both sides. 
 
Now I recognize the members opposite are attempting to make mischief here 
and suggest we are doing it behind closed doors.  In fact the very reason 
why a good deal of it is in regulation is because we want to do it in an 
open, consultative fashion.  If I were to table regulations here, that's 
exactly how they'd be drafted -- behind closed doors.  By leaving them 
until later and involving the public, we're doing it in the open, in an 



 

 

accountable, accessible fashion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, that is a total 
affront to this Assembly.  To say that anything that is displayed in this 
Assembly is done behind closed doors, is absolutely ludicrous.  That's why 
business people don't trust you.  That's why your fax line is burning up 
today and yesterday and the day before because the business groups in this 
province and the people that would be most affected by these regulations 
are saying it is done behind closed doors, sir. 
 
You haven't consulted.  The place for those regulations is before the 
Legislative Assembly, sir, in full view of the public, so that we can 
debate them, so that people feel comfortable. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you please draft the draft regulations before this 
House so that the business groups and the labour groups and everyone will 
have the comfort of knowing that their representatives have had full view 
of these regulations?  Would you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What we witnessed today, Mr. Speaker, is a stark 
contrast in the way that the public business is approached.  When those 
members were in office, they sought to divide and conquer.  They sought to 
pick the most powerful political group, cosy up to them, and then attack 
the weaker groups.  And they did that for almost 10 years. 
 
We have sought to do the opposite.  We have sought a consultative approach 
which involves people in the resolution of the disputes which affect them.  
And that's what this is. 
 
I know that's not what the hon. members opposite want.  What they want is a 
series of regulations here which they can attack as being anti-business and 
that they think will get the most power . . . a more powerful group aligned 
with them, and they don't care about the workers. 
 
But I say to members opposite, it's not the way the public business is 
being done.  And the fact that you did that, the public business in that 
fashion for 10 years is part of the why . . . part of the reason why 
there's 10 of you over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I find this 
absolutely appalling.  You say that you've done your homework.  You say 
that you've done all the consultation that's necessary.  You say that you 
have got the answer for a good business-labour environment in this 
province. 
 
Well if you've done all those things, Mr. Minister, then just put it in 
writing, put it before the people's Assembly, and let's have a look at it.  



 

 

And you can stamp "draft" on it so that you can change those regulations 
any time thereafter in consultation, Mr. Minister, with the folks. 
 
If you're so confident, why not do your homework and put it before all of 
us?  Isn't what this place is about, Mr. Minister?  That's why they don't 
trust you -- because you say one thing but you're scared to do what's 
proper.  Why is that, Mr. Minister?  Why are you scared to table those 
regulations in front of this Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Party both 
nationally and provincially should have no difficulty recognizing the state 
of not being trusted.  He should be able to recognize that relatively easy. 
 
I say to members opposite, we want to involve both sides in the resolution 
of these difficult problems.  And that is why we are leaving a good deal of 
the detail to regulations, so that they can be involved. 
 
Both sides have expressed whether or not they like what's in the Bill, and 
I will admit that that is controversial.  The process outside this Chamber 
is I think less controversial because they want to be involved in the 
solution to this matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, last year when you tabled both the 
occupational health and safety and workers' comp, you put a mandatory 
prepublication requirement with those Bills -- mandatory.  You felt that 
before those Bills were proclaimed there had to be a time period in there 
when those issues would become public and people could compliment you or 
complain to you about what was in those Bills.  The least you could do is 
put the same requirement in these, Mr. Minister -- mandatory -- that it be 
looked at ahead of time so if this House is out of session at least people 
know that the public has the opportunity to comment. 
 
Isn't that what this place is all about, Mr. Minister?  If it was good 
enough last year, could you at least include that this year?  Would you do 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's interesting that the member refers to last 
year.  I recall last year when we were discussing the amendments to the 
Workers' Compensation Board and occupational health and safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard the most dire predictions about what was going to 
happen when these Bills were passed.  In fact what is happening a year 
later is both of these processes are operating to a good deal of 
satisfaction by the business community.  It's noteworthy that they've never 
used last year's Bills as an example of how things shouldn't be done.  Why?  
Because it worked well.  We're repeating it this year. 
 



 

 

I recognize you people have a great deal of difficulty recognizing success.  
You flee in the opposite direction when you see it, but The Occupational 
Health and Safety Bill and the regulatory process and the way those are 
drafted up was a success.  We recognize it and we want to repeat it.  I 
recognize that's not what you're into.  What you're into is sowing discord 
and conflict.  And I tell you, you belong to a different era in Canadian 
politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again the minister is off in 
some kind of wonderland.  Because, Mr. Minister, the opposition tabled 
dozens of amendments -- dozens of amendments which were debated in open 
public in this Assembly, Mr. Minister, because that process was open at 
least.  We had the opportunity to air all of the issues, and the amendments 
could be debated and voted upon. 
 
What you want to do is do this behind closed doors.  That's why they don't 
trust you and that's why you are afraid, Mr. Minister.  That's why you are 
afraid to bring draft regulations in here is because you cannot stand the 
heat. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you once again.  If it was good enough last year 
could you at least include that pre-look at these Bills as you did last 
year, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- To the member from Jurassic Park, let me try this 
one more time. 
 
Conflict, and dividing and conquering belongs to the past.  That may have 
been the way politics was conducted in the past; that's not how it's done 
now and that's not how successful governments are operating. 
 
Governments which succeed are those which enter into a consultative 
process, and that's what we're going to do.  And if you people believe that 
what worked in the '80s is going to continue to work, well go on believing 
it and enjoy Jurassic Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Langenburg Drainage Project 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 DOver the last two years, Sask Water has provided assistance for the 
Langenburg East Conservation and Development Authority project.  The 
project will drain 37 square miles of farm land into the Assiniboine River 
and will cost local residents over half a million dollars.  Some people are 
for this and some people are against this. 
 
Mr. Minister, where do you stand? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the member for the 
question.  Conservation and development areas in the province . . . there 
are over 100 of them, where the people in a basin join together to work on 
protecting their land against flooding.  In this particular area the same 
need is there.  There are a group of farmers that would like to protect 
their agricultural land.  There are a group of farmers that are not 
supporting the drainage of their land.  It drains into the Assiniboine 
River. 
 
What Sask Water has done is worked with SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) to find out if it is an environmentally sound project.  
There has to be approval by the Manitoba government as well because, as the 
member on the other side knows, the water does drain into a river that runs 
in Manitoba.  So it's a very complex issue and I would hope that the local 
people in that area will come to some kind of an agreement, either for or 
against the project. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, it is Sask Water's stated policy not to 
support wetlands drainage projects.  When you answered questions from the 
ratepayers of Churchbridge you made it clear that Sask Water does not 
support wetlands drainage.  Mr. Minister, your government has international 
commitments under the North American waterfowl management plan and your 
policy is not to provide money for drainage projects. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you explain your government's spending on the 
Langenburg drainage project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the member opposite may not 
know, C&Ds (conservation and development) are formed by a group of farmers 
in a particular area of voting.  In this case there were 73 per cent of the 
farmers in that area supported the project and so the C&D was then formed. 
 
Funding under The Water Corporations Act is a 50/50 share on approved 
projects.  The projects that she is speaking about, Mr. Speaker, is not 
approved at this time.  It's in the process of being worked on.  There 
still needs approval from Environment and there still needs approval by the 
Manitoba government.  So I believe that she's a little ahead of herself at 
this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, I would like you to make this clear.  In a 
letter dated August 5, 1993 your predecessor wrote to Sask Water about the, 
and I quote, Langenburg East drainage proposal.  Mr. Minister, your own 
predecessor knew this was a drainage project but still supported it. 
 
I have with me a letter from the Saskatchewan Environment's own wildlife 
biologist.  The letter says clearly that this is a drainage project and not 
any other kind of project.  Your stated policy is against wetland drainage.  
You are supporting this in direct conflict with Sask Water policy. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you sort out this mess about whether or not the NDP (New 



 

 

Democratic Party) government has a clear policy on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, Sask Water are neither for or against 
projects like this; they're a body that are there for use by the people of 
Saskatchewan, for technical assistance and surveying and engineering and 
that sort of thing. 
 
I want to tell the member opposite again that 73 per cent of the people in 
that particular C&D district supported the project and that's why there is 
a C&D.  I want to say again that Sask Water are neither proponents or 
against the project.  They're there to assist the local people if the need 
arises for their services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, you quote the 73 per cent, but as I 
understand it, many of those farmers who supported the formation of the 
conservation district now do not support it.  Mr. Minister, your government 
supports an international plan to protect wetlands, but on the other hand, 
you are supporting the Langenburg drainage project. 
 
It is clear to me that in your government the left hand doesn't know what 
the right hand is doing.  The confusion over your policy is splitting the 
community and interfering with their lives.  Mr. Minister, how long is it 
going to take your government to clear up this issue for the people in the 
Langenburg area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I said before, the local 
people in the Langenburg area are working on this issue.  It's a local 
issue.  They have the right, if sixty-six and two-thirds per cent of the 
original people that signed the petition change their mind, they can sign 
it and cancel the agreement.  That's perfectly their right by law.  And so 
if they would like to do that, that's certainly fine with Sask Water. 
 
I'm wondering why you're playing politics on the backs of local people --  
again dividing people for and against.  Which side are you on and what 
would you do, Madam Member? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Danger of Pipeline Explosions 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the 
minister responsible for public safety.  Mr. Minister, a report from the 
Transportation Safety Board has warned of chances of a serious explosion on 
the petroleum transmission company's pipeline that runs throughout western 
Canada. 
 
This report notes that the pipeline runs near railroads, major highways, an 
Indian reserve, and an airport, in addition to many towns and cities.  Mr. 
Minister, we only have to recall the explosion that occurred in the Maple 
Creek area to realize the significant danger that this could pose. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, have you read this report, and can you tell us what measures 
your government is taking to ensure that Saskatchewan people are protected 
from this potential disaster? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that this is an 
issue that is controlled by federal regulation.  And what we will do is get 
a response for the member as it would apply in that circumstance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This may indeed be federal 
legislation and regulation involved here, but it's Saskatchewan people that 
are at danger. 
 
There are measures available to monitor pipelines, such as electronic 
equipment that can be sent down the pipeline.  Will you investigate as to 
whether or not this type of equipment is being used to protect Saskatchewan 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, we'll check on that and get an answer back 
to you as to whether or not the federal regulations are being applied in 
this circumstance. 
 
(1045) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I would like to convert to motion for return 
(debatable). 
 
The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debate). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 

1993 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and once more welcome to the 
minister and his officials on this particular Bill. 
 
Yesterday we were talking about the new corporation and how it would 
function. And where we'd left off this was going to be a non-profit 
corporation with the government putting so much in and an expectation from 
private sectors.  If things go well and there's a revenue source, a pool of 
money, will that be shared with the private sector people who are investing 
in this thing?  Is there some way of . . . if there's a sort of a windfall 
occurs because of something? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the way we see this happening 
if there were to be a surplus, that first of all there would be more 



 

 

activity in the trade area. But if it ever got to the point where it looked 
like the budget was . . . the money was coming in quicker than what it was 
needed, what would happen is fees would be adjusted in order to reflect the 
proper amount of income. 
 
There is one experience that we've looked at while we were in Hong Kong. 
And I know the member opposite has been there and probably is aware of the 
Hong Kong Trade Council which basically levies a fee on imports and exports 
in order to have money to provide for more trade development.  They have an 
absolute huge surplus in their fund and what they have looked at doing is 
other kinds of investments.  We don't see anything like that happening 
because we would see the mandate of this corporation to be narrowly defined 
to be trade development and those things related to it. 
 
So I would expect if there were a surplus and it looked like the surplus 
was growing and was more than was needed for trade development, we would 
then adjust the fees and membership allowances in order to reflect that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think this is an important question, Mr. Minister, 
because I need you to tell me if the board will have the control for 
instance in selection of staff, facilities, approval of individual 
expenses, appointment of management personnel as it grows.  All of those 
issues are very important as ultimately they would be with the finances of 
it. 
 
I need to understand, because the government will still be the single 
biggest player in this thing, who will make those decisions and will there 
be that sense of independence which people wish?  And I believe the Hong 
Kong situation that you mentioned, there is a lot of independence there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well truly what we're trying to do is have as 
much empowerment and responsibility that would be based in the community or 
by the membership of the organization. 
 
But how it will work, there will be in fact a board of directors -- it will 
be made up of public and private sector individuals -- and they will then 
hire a CEO (chief executive officer).  And as in normal circumstances, the 
CEO will then be responsible to the board for hiring practices and going 
through the process of arranging the staff within the authority. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Will the board members representing private investors be 
bound by any type of confidentiality or secrecy agreements regarding 
decisions the board of management might be . . . And I think, too, your 
role as a cabinet minister, you swear an oath.  People in departments often 
have to sign agreements or clauses.  I mean you deal with industry and 
their provisions, and by nature . . . I remember in Energy and Mines how my 
officials had to deal with reality. 
 
Because you're going to have this mix here, do you envision those types of 
agreements having to be in place for the private sector representatives on 
the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I expect they will be in place, but I don't want 



 

 

to prejudge what the new board will set in place by way of by-laws or 
regulations that staff and board members will want to apply. 
 
But it's obviously, I think, in the best interest of the new corporation to 
have that kind of security.  Obviously you're going to be dealing with very 
sensitive issues where there will be competition within the province, but 
also right across the country.  So the need for confidentiality, I think, 
will be very important. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Because that naturally leads to 
another question that has been asked of me and I need to understand this.  
Will the consulting and the efforts only go to companies that actually buy 
a membership? 
 
Obviously they're going to get involved in this because they want access to 
a market-place; they want the inside edge of the track to get somewhere.  
You're envisioning this being open to Saskatchewan, anyone in the province.  
They're going to be sworn to secrecy.  They're paying a fee.  Are they the 
only ones that will get the benefits of the employees and staff and the 
initiatives of the organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Really what will happen here is many of the 
services that are now done for entrepreneurs in the province -- for 
example, trade information that . . . For example, if you were to phone our 
trade development office right now, there are information pamphlets and 
information available that we would provide.  That service will be 
maintained.  So that will be one level of service. 
 
Then I would see, for example, if there were need for further research and 
development over and above what is presently being provided, there may be a 
fee for service for an individual or a company.  And then further to that, 
you would also have the membership that would actually have paid an annual 
fee.  They will then be able to vote in terms of choosing the 
representatives of the board. 
 
So there would sort of be three levels of participation within the new 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- At the end of the day here, if I'm a potential investor in 
this thing, I mean there has to be some prize here at the end of the day 
beyond sitting on a board that will have a lot of government representation 
on it. 
 
I mean I understand where you're going, but at the end of the day, if I'm 
out there in the business community and I'm manufacturing product A and 
there's a half a dozen of us that manufacture product A, I'm going to say 
to myself, well if the same services are available to me and I can get the 
same prize at the end of it, why would I bother ponying up a fairly 
significant chunk of capital, perhaps to invest in this corporation, then 
sit on the board, if the guy, my competitor, who also wants to export to 
the Pacific Rim, will get the same services that . . . 
 
There's something here that doesn't quite square with me, Mr. Minister, so 



 

 

maybe you can tell me why I would want to do that, in the face of my 
competitor also wanting the same market-place and using the same services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member should know that, first of all, on the 
board of directors which we're talking about, the membership will be made 
up of public and private sector.  And we expect the members of the new 
corporation, that is, people who pay an annual fee, they will have 
responsibility, for example, for electing the members to the board. 
 
We expect the board will be between 12 and 15, with the majority being 
private sector.  The ratio we're sort of looking at right now would be 
one-third government representation, two-thirds private sector. 
 
Now I just want to reflect for a moment on your question about what will be 
the advantage of paying a fee.  Obviously a number of companies are saying 
that in the area of travelling with experts on trade missions, where there 
is an actual expense involved, there may be a fee for service or the 
membership fee may cover part of that opportunity to attend trade missions 
which those people who don't pay a fee for services or are not members and 
don't require that extensive assistance from the corporation . . . will be 
able to maintain the close relationship that they now have with our 
department in terms of finding out certain informations that are available 
to the public at the present time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- As I understand the process, there's going to be a 
significant shift of folks from the department to the corporation.  And I 
would think the corporation, if it has the latitude that you talk about, is 
going to want the most competent folks that it can get its hands on to do 
the job. 
 
Because you're telling the corporation that they have to take the employees 
and they have to take them at their current salaries and they have to take 
them at their agreements, if they're in scope or out of scope or whatever.  
They have to do all of those things, okay? So fair ball.  But you're still 
going to want the best people available going out of the department. 
 
In other words, you're downsizing your department significantly by rolling 
the people into this thing.  Unless we're keeping the same department and 
we're 
 Dadding more, and I don't think that's the intent.  I think this is to 
downsize. 
 
I still don't understand what the prize is at the end of the day for me as 
a business person in this province who will have competitors or will have 
people in the same game accessing the same markets.  I mean the pork 
marketing agency, in my view, isn't a good example because all hog 
producers in the province belong to that.  That's an outgrowth of a former 
government function with the marketing agency. 
 
But there are a lot of people out there who you've taken on trade missions 
who are in competitive groupings.  And I don't understand yet what the 
prize is for me to pony up and be part of the board if I can get the same 
services without paying them.  You say I've accessed the department but 



 

 

you've taken the best folks out of the department and put them under the 
agency of the board.  And it's not squaring yet with me, and maybe there's 
a logical explanation. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well there is.  It sort of takes quite some time 
sitting in meetings and working this thing through to really see the 
advantage.  But with your experience, and I know you have had experience in 
attending trade missions and being involved in trade, this I think may help 
explain how the new system will work, and the advantages over the old 
system. 
 
In the days past and really up till now, what happened with the 1.4 million  
-- let's use that as the example because that's the amount of money the 
province is talking about putting into the initial phase -- the government 
would sit here in the Legislative Building and decide whether or not there 
was going to be trade-offs in Hong Kong, for example.  Or we would decide 
whether or not we were going to open . . . or have a government-led trade 
mission to Cuba or Mexico. 
 
The advantage here is that when those kind of decisions are made now, there 
will be a major part of private sector involvement in deciding . . . and I 
use Hong Kong as the example because it's going to be one of the first 
tasks that the new trade development corporation takes on.  Because in 
meeting with representatives of the Hong Kong community earlier this week, 
this was one of the topics, what do we do with the Hong Kong trade area?  
Is Hong Kong, for example, the gateway to China?  Or is China developing so 
quickly on its own it's going to be Shanghai or Beijing where the office 
should be located? 
 
Now obviously the people in Hong Kong would very much like us to 
re-establish some sort of a centre, not a free-standing one because they 
understand that that's too expensive for a province the size of 
Saskatchewan to have, but possibly in conjunction with the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool or Canpotex, having a Saskatchewan unit in Hong Kong if we 
believe Hong Kong will continue to be the entry point to China, which many 
people believe. 
 
There's another flow of thought though that believes that after 1997 Hong 
Kong will become diminished in importance in Asia, and actually Beijing or 
China will take over that role.  The beauty of this system will be is that 
decision will not be made only within government; it will be made in the 
Trade Development Corporation. 
 
And the budget will be lodged there from the private sector and government 
in true partnership, not 1.4 million but we expect 1.8 or $2 million.  
We'll have a bigger combined budget and we'll have much, much better 
intelligence on how to spend that money.  Not that the department wasn't 
doing a good job, because I think they were; but it will just be that much 
better because we will have public input into the decisions being made 
about where trade and trade missions, trade offices, should be located. 
 



 

 

And I just think that overall you will end up with a much stronger system, 
both here in trade as well as in tourism because there are direct parallels 
-- what we're doing in our trade area as well as in tourism.  And the 
business community in fact is very excited about this move from a strictly 
government-driven trade operation to one that is jointly managed and 
operated in a partnership between the private and the public sector. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- I understand all that, Mr. Minister.  And I think the era 
of government standalone operations in Asia are probably a thing of the 
past.  Other provinces had far more elaborate operations than what we ever 
did there.  And I'm not sure what, at the end of day, what the cost/benefit 
analysis pointed out.  I think everybody is having second thoughts. 
 
You're right.  The world's changing very rapidly.  Private sector people 
understand those changes far quicker than governments do.  But I still 
don't understand, even given all of that, at the end of day if I'm company 
A in Saskatchewan and say I want to export in the Pacific Rim and I want to 
use Hong Kong or Guangzhou or Shanghai or wherever I got to get to, if 
company B, C, and D are also in the same game I'm at, what's the prize at 
the end of the day for me to pay my membership fees and pay these things, 
be a shareholder, if the best services available are going to be in the 
corporation obviously serving the folks that are on the board? 
 
And I still haven't got . . . because I am going to have to answer to the 
folks out there, when you set this thing up, of why I didn't stand up and 
fight on their behalf if they are excluded from the best services possible.  
It's either you almost got to be all in or all out on these issues with 
government.  You're going to get in a bind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The key here is I think for the member opposite 
to look at some of them that are functioning and functioning very well in 
other parts of the world.  But you really do have an opportunity at 
different levels to do different things.  And one should understand that on 
a fee-for-service basis the more services you need, the more money you will 
be willing and want to spend in order to get that service. 
 
I say again there will be a basic structure of free information and 
brochures and contacts that will be available to all citizens.  But as you 
go up the ladder, people will be able to pick their level of involvement in 
the corporation based on what they feel is best for their individual 
circumstance. 
 
And I say again, a small seed-grower who may want to export some grain to 
the United States -- because this is one of our key areas that we see a 
major shift in from just producing seed materials for consumption to moving 
to seed materials for providing seed to other parts of the world -- that if 
a small producer needs some pamphlets on how to arrange export permits to 
the Canadian Wheat Board, that can be done and you call the trade 
development officer and they will provide that information for you. 
 
However, if you're interested in doing a business trip into Vietnam because 
it looks like an area where your company can expand quickly and you want to 
attend on a trade mission, you will be able to find out from the Trade 



 

 

Development Corporation whether there's a unit being put together, and for 
a fee for service you may be able to get some special attention in that 
trade mission, but you will be responsible for paying a fee for service. 
 
Now if you feel strongly that you want to be involved in the actual trade 
development of the province -- and many companies do because they see it as 
being that important -- you may want to actually pay a membership fee that 
gives you the right, one, to possibly be on the board of directors or even 
vote for and be involved in selecting the people who would be on that board 
of directors. 
 
Now this is not my concept.  This has been a concept that has been 
developed I think in large part, I think it is fair to say, by the business 
community because they see that you have to have a multi-levelled system of 
trade development because the needs of various participants in the economy 
are very different, and therefore you have to have different levels of 
financial involvement as well. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- So we can finish this by saying then that the level of 
economic participation probably determines how far you go with this thing.  
I mean it is strictly going to be based on a monetary entry system and up 
the ladder.  And I can appreciate that type of system. 
 
Now my final question is, at the end of the day you're telling me you've 
got about . . . envision a one-third/two-thirds breakdown on the board, 
which would say to me that there is a majority available to make these 
decisions outside of Executive Council decisions.  Are you comfortable with 
that and do you believe that that's the way that should work, that this 
board in effect can buy a majority vote and overrule executive government, 
even though you're a partner in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think the ultimate control here is, as we 
talked about yesterday, is the coming to the House for your allocation of 
money.  And the board will know that if they perform well and are doing a 
great job, then the minister, whether it's me or the next minister, will 
come to the House and ask for an allocation of money. 
 
If there are good trade development taking place, the minister will then 
have a much easier time of getting an allocation next year of 1.4 million 
or 1.5 million; but if there's no results from that that are tangible and 
that people can see, then we'll have to work harder.  The ultimate decision 
will be that government still has final involvement, as with other 
authorities and other granting agencies that we have. 
 
And I think the next couple of years, next five years -- because I think 
that's really a development process and this will take some time to judge 
and evaluate -- but I think we'll find that the freeing up, let's put it 
that way, of the trade development area from strictly government to 
government and business, we will find that we will have a very, very 
healthy organization that will be led by the best of government and the 
best from business. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 



 

 

 
Clause 2 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Chair, I move: 
 

 That clause 2(b) of the printed Bill be amended by adding immediately 
after the words "subject to the approval of" where they occur in clause 
9(1)(g) as being enacted therein the following: 

 
 "the Legislative Assembly, having first been presented the objectives, 

mandate and proposed budget of any proposed body corporate," 
 

I so move, Mr. Chair. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 
 
The Chair: -- We'll give the minister a moment here and then to ask him to 
introduce the officials who have joined us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I'd like to introduce Denise Gustavson, who 
looks after our community bond program and other business development 
programs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I've just a few questions on 
this.  I need to understand the changes that you're contemplating with the 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission in being able to switch from straight 
community base to a regional economic development base, if I understand 
what's happening here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, really for the member, I want to say that as 
per the auditor's recommendation, what we are doing is ceasing the 
exemption of the bond quotes from the Securities Commission. 
 
The other thing that we are doing here . . . These are relatively small 
amendments in one way; but on another hand, making the regional economic 
development authorities eligible as incorporating bodies is actually a 
fairly major change, that the 20 or 25 REDAs (regional economic development 
authorities) that we will establish over the next coming months will really 
I think emphasize an extra, important role that the community bonds will 
have in the province. 
 
I'd like to at this time too, Mr. Chairman, introduce Tom Marwick, who is 
the individual who heads up our whole cooperative division sector in the 



 

 

department, which includes the REDAs; and Tom, as you know, has a great 
deal of expertise in a number of areas working with communities, and so he 
is joining us on this issue as well. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, can you give me an update on community bonds?  
As you know there was a lot of support all across the province when they 
were introduced.  Most comments in the media were very positive at the 
time, and I won't bother quoting those to you.  But I would like an update 
of how many community bond initiatives were begun in 1992, 1993, and 1994; 
how many were started but then failed or didn't go forward in each of those 
years?  Do you have that information available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I'll get that for you.  I've got my staff 
just writing me a note that will tell me the exact numbers.  I have to say 
that as with many programs, the community bond program started off with a 
flourish and there was a lot of excitement; a lot of communities moved 
quickly to establish and inquire about and work on community bonds. 
 
We had, as you know, a little trouble with a couple of community bonds that 
got significant amounts of attention -- the Trinitel community bond in 
Melville -- and I won't get into that.  But that had some significant 
impact.  And maybe there's always a silver lining on a cloud, but I think 
that brought an awareness to many communities that this simply wasn't a 
mechanism to go out and round up a bunch of money without the 
responsibility of having to pay the money back to the individuals. 
 
And there was surrounding the Melville incident, while it didn't do 
terminal damage to the program, it certainly brought a significant wake-up 
call to communities that there was need to do due diligence, that these 
projects had to be reviewed properly.  Then flowing out of that, some 
amendments that came into place last year and then the amendments this 
year. 
 
But I say, many of the community bond programs are doing very well.  I 
think to date, four have actually paid a dividend to the bondholders, which 
I think is excellent.  And while not each and every one of them is doing 
well, I think the program is still in very, very good shape.  And actually 
a number of other provinces are now moving to look at the community bond 
program. 
 
I think Manitoba actually has one that is very much based on Saskatchewan.  
And while the program was being worked on in Manitoba, our staff were 
involved by telephone and in writing, giving assistance to the Manitoba 
government in setting up their program.  And I know the federal minister 
has talked to me about the possibility of a pilot project in western Canada 
that would actually extend the community bond program to be a joint federal 
and provincial plan. 
 
And I think some day really what you need are the three levels of 
government involved in the community bond program -- that would be the 
municipal, provincial, and federal. And I think the more entities you have 



 

 

involved really in sharing the risk and driving these economic programs, 
probably the stronger they will be. 
 
I just have the fiscal to date, in 1993-94, and I'll just give this to you. 
Bond issue applications pending, there are 5; bond offerings proceeding of 
making investments, 4; for a total of 9.  And the total subscribed during 
that period is 3.2 million, rounded off to 3.2 million.  Number of 
investors, 756, and this number is of course up to interpretation, but the 
number of related jobs created, 36. 
 
Now when I say is not absolute, you know how these work.  I mean they 
announce how many jobs they will have and that maybe a few more, a few 
less, but roughly 36 jobs. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If you could just give me those 
years by year:  number started, number completed, number that were 
terminated for one reason or another; and perhaps for '92, '93, and '94.  
If you wish you could go back to . . . 1991 would be good then, '91, '92, 
'93 '94.  And you could just give me the community and when it . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well what I can give you, I don't have that 
breakdown year by year, but I have sort of the 1993-94 and then the program 
to date.  I'll give you that for now and then I'll have them go and break 
out the total. 
 
But we have bond issue applications pending, 5 -- and that's a constant, so 
that isn't very relevant.  Bond offerings in making investment during that 
whole period or at this present time, 6; bond offerings completed and funds 
invested, 24; total number of active projects, 35.  So in this year under 
review or to date, we have 9 and in total there are 35.  Total amounts 
subscribed this year, as I mentioned, 3.2 million, in total 16 million; 
number of investors this year, 756, in total 6,300; and jobs created in 
total, 340. 
 
Now I would have to on those jobs again go back and see whether 340 are 
those created and whether they're still existing or not, but I can do a 
little research on that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- I don't need the job numbers particularly, Mr. Minister.  
I'm more interested in who initiated them, what communities in each year, 
which ones actually followed through and which ones didn't come to fruition 
for one reason or another. 
 
Mr. Minister, in section 5, 5.1 of the Bill which states: 
 

 Where a community bond corporation has not issued any community bonds and 
the minister is satisfied that the corporation is inactive or has failed 
to comply with this Act (etc.) 

 
that you can dissolve the corporation on any terms the minister considers 
appropriate. 
 
Why was it necessary to add this section to the legislation? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, so the member knows, there is or never has 
been any active bond co. that has been dissolved.  But what happens in some 
cases, is there is a bond co. organized and developed, and then, my 
understanding is, no money is raised and then it sits there and it 
deteriorates and becomes inactive.  And people on the board move away and 
the department has a very difficult time sending out material because 
they're required to continue to service that portfolio.  And at a time 
where it's agreed that there is simply no bond being developed then it 
makes sense in order for the administration of the program to simply end 
and cancel the application. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Could you, Mr. Minister, ask your staff to sort of put 
together a generic criteria, for instance, that would fit here -- you 
mentioned a few things -- because they've had experience now over almost 
five years time of what the process that goes on when a community becomes 
interested and then the proponents come forward and various things, give me 
their best shot at when the minister would exercise this particular section 
of the Bill.  And you can send that to me at a later date.  I don't need 
that right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the staff are saying that there are cases 
where the community is actually saying, look, you're sending out this 
material but there is no bond co. here any more; the directors have left 
the community; it's absurd for you to keep spending money to try to service 
something that doesn't exist any more. 
 
So really the only occasion where I could see this being used is almost 
where it's initiated at the local level, that they no longer existed, and 
at the present time we have no mechanism to say it's over.  And what this 
does would give the department that ability.  It would make absolutely no 
sense for the government to end a bond co. that had any flicker of life 
left in it because that's really what the program is all about. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- I can appreciate the difficulty, Minister, but there have 
been a few circumstances come to my attention where people in the community 
felt that there hadn't been a good process in place, that there was some 
unanswered questions when a bond sort of fell off the edge of the table.  
And that's why I . . . And I know you yourself probably maybe haven't had 
to deal with this, but I think your officials would have some good ideas 
and I will accept whatever they send across in due course as legitimate 
reasons why these things wouldn't quite work out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just so it's on record, I'll get in writing for 
you the kind of circumstances where that might apply. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to establish the Tourism Authority 



 

 

 
The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the minister to join the officials 
who have joined us here today . . . or to introduce the officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, joining us, to my left is Neil 
Sawatsky, the director of tourism information; and of course Leona Gorr, 
our acting deputy minister of Economic Development. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, there's been a lot 
of discussion around the various groups, the stakeholders in the tourism 
industry, over this initiative. 
 
The comments I made to you yesterday about what is happening in other areas 
of your government is very applicable to this Bill today when we see the 
various initiatives here. 
 
(1130) 
 
A lot of the groups that are stakeholders in this industry I think have 
made very strong representations to you and your government that they don't 
like the proposed labour legislation one iota.  I've got letter after 
letter, faxes coming in from a lot of the stakeholders in tourism who are 
just adamant that if their costs are driven up significantly, none of the 
things that you want to achieve by this particular initiative in tourism 
are going to come to pass because they won't be able 
 Dto cope with the concerns. 
 
And I suspect you'll give me the same answer that you did yesterday when we 
were talking about economic development and that particular area, but it is 
a real concern.  And I would hope that as the minister responsible for 
these interest groups, that you're putting their concerns forward on a very 
strong basis.  They employ a lot of part-time people; they employ a lot of 
people at the lower end of the wage scale; they're very seasonally 
dependent; they rely on our student population immensely in order to carry 
forward their businesses.  And if those students and others are prohibited 
from joining the tourism business on its regional demands, it's going to be 
very difficult for them to cope. 
 
So I wonder if you would care, just for the record, to give these people 
some comfort that their concerns are being listened to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- First of all, I just want to say to the member, 
about the process that we went into leading up to the development of the 
Tourism Authority, over a year ago we set up what we called the ministerial 
task force, or minister's task force.  And basically we established the 
task force that here again was made up of people from our department, 
prominent people from the department and prominent people from the 
industry, who became involved. 
 
For example TISASK (Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan), Mona 
Selanders was involved; Saskatchewan Hotels Association, Bill Nelson; Sask 



 

 

Outfitters, Donna Carlson; Sask Country Vacations, Beatrice Magee; Regional 
Tourism Association, Ken Ricketts; Urban Tourism Association, Jim Kilkenny, 
from the Ramada here in Regina; transportation, Floyd Glass from Athabasca 
Airways; service stations, Kelsey Calder; retail, Joan Cleland; arts and 
culture, Don Martin; and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians, Wayne 
Morris and Lindsay Cyr were involved; and the Metis Society, Art Daniels 
from Saskatoon.  Now members from the department, Leona Gorr and Neil 
Sawatzky and Shelley Duke, Darryl McCallum and Wendy Gold. 
 
So you can see the team of people really were those who probably knew, 
although not exclusively, but some of the most well-briefed and 
well-educated people on tourism in the province.  I say again not 
exclusively, but certainly representing those who know a lot about tourism. 
 
What came out of the discussions was that here again with limited dollars, 
both within the tourism industry itself and the private side and in 
government, there was a realization that there was a great need for focus 
on themes and focus on centres of excellence in tourism.  And that could be 
much better done through a joint authority made up of public and private 
sector than the government doing its thing and the private sector doing 
theirs. 
 
I don't want to dwell on it, but I can tell you that there was a great deal 
of concern about the Get Smart ads that were developed within the 
Department of Tourism at one point in the recent past without consultation 
with the private sector.  And I think they felt that there was a 
significant wastage of money there, that if it had been done jointly, we 
would have got a much more intense tourism package put together. 
 
So shortly after the '91 election, what we did is we put together a team of 
people from the private and public sector who really began to develop, both 
in terms of choosing our ad agent for the department, working with us on 
developing themes, and we decided to do joint development of tourism.  This 
then led to the establishment of a much more fundamental and permanent 
organization, i.e., the Tourism Authority which we are dealing with today, 
flowing out of the minister's task force. 
 
I want to indicate again, coming to your main point, that is, how does 
labour regulation affect the tourism industry, obviously labour standards 
affect it much more than The Trade Union Act, so I'll focus my comments 
there.  Although the chairman will know that we're limited how much time we 
want to spend on The Labour Standards Act while we're dealing with the 
tourism Bill. 
 
But I just say to you that there has been a great deal of consultation.  
There has been a great deal of consultation on this.  And I think some of 
their biggest concerns have in fact been dealt with by the Minister of 
Labour who has indicated very clearly, in going back to question period 
today, as to why the regulations are not tabled here. 
 
What he has worked out with the industry is a sectoral arrangement whereby 
the regulations will actually be developed with each sector in mind.  I 
understand that tourism will be a separate sector.  And actually the 



 

 

regulations that apply here will be tailored and developed over the coming 
months, with tourism involvement, sitting at the table, designing 
regulations that will best fit that industry. And not unlike what we did 
with the occupational health and safety, and other areas, where we work out 
sectoral arrangements in regulation to best meet their needs. 
 
I can give you the commitment that the Tourism Authority will be working 
very, very closely with the Minister of Labour and the Minister of Economic 
Development to make sure that the best interests of job creation in the 
province in the tourism area, as well as the best interests of the 
employees, are taken into consideration when those regulations come 
forward. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it sounds good, but unfortunately . . . 
like the people you mentioned there are not unknown to myself and others.  
And the discussions that you are talking about are a year old, 
unfortunately.  And their opinion, I would suggest to you, sir, has changed 
fairly dramatically in the meantime. 
 
There is a great deal of unease because they don't particularly like the 
idea of their industry, as you put it, being cherry-picked by the Minister 
of Labour as he picks and chooses his political fights in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  These people are in it with everybody else.  
Business is business, and they happen to make their dollars through tourism 
whereas somebody else might be manufacturing or something else. 
 
But the fact is that the business climate of the province, Mr. Minister, 
and the tone that it sets is the same.  And I know it's easier for you and 
everyone else if you can sort of cherry-pick your way through here and 
offer this group something that you don't offer somebody else and do it 
that way, but I'm not sure at the end of the day that you will have 
something better than what was there before.  Because the business climate, 
the ability to invest . . . 
 
You all go to the same bank, Mr. Minister, you all go to the same credit 
union, and you all rely on people in the market-place to come up with risk 
capital to fund your projects.  And all of those people assess this 
province in a macroeconomic way as they develop their plans and their 
aspirations.  And you can't simply say, well I'm going to set you over here 
and either punish you or reward you because of how friendly you've been to 
the government.  And unfortunately there is some fear in the tourism 
business  that's exactly what you're doing. 
 
And I will give you an example, and these letters are known to you.  The 
aboriginal community have written you a number of times with concerns on 
the way that their representation will be handled by the new Authority and 
the issues surrounding reserve land, representation on the board, that type 
of thing.  They don't want to be separated, Mr. Minister, from everybody 
else.  They wish to have their rights but they want to know that they are a 
strong player in the industry. 
 
And I believe what you're doing on the labour side of the issue, if the 
minister refuses to bring forward those regulatory initiatives to allow 



 

 

people to view them in the public, will mean that this jurisdiction isn't 
as competitive as others ultimately when it comes to spending tourism 
dollars. 
 
And my discussions with people in the tourism business tell me that they 
would love to see a draft of those regulations, at some point, in full 
public view -- at some point in full public view.  That's why I suggested 
today that the minister have a mandatory review period of those regulations 
attached to the legislation, so that the TISASK people and others could 
look at them and not be fearful of the outcome. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just so that the member is clear on what we are 
doing here when he says that the regulations, as they would apply to labour 
standards, should be universal across the piece shows a lack of 
understanding of, for example, the cleaning services that might apply to 
the cleaning service industry in Regina, which much takes place late at 
night or very early in the morning, and the difference in the need for 
labour standards that might apply there versus a northern camp in tourism 
where it is very, very different.  And therefore the sectoral arrangements 
on regulations as they would apply to labour standards become very, very 
important. 
 
And the sectors are very clear on that.  The tourism sector is not saying 
they want the same standards on labour standards as other sectors in the 
province, so that isn't an accurate statement.  They're saying we very much 
appreciate the opportunity to sit down with you and work out what the 
regulations are going to be as they apply to our specific industry because 
our industry is very different. 
 
Tourism is very intensive during certain periods of the year.  If you're at 
a ski hill in Cypress Hills, it's very different than running a fishing 
lodge in northern Saskatchewan.  And they want to make sure that all the 
nuances are taken into consideration in the regulation, and therefore 
there'll be a period of weeks, if not months, that the Department of Labour 
and the various sectors will sit at the table and negotiate that out. 
 
Now I think that's much better than the minister arbitrarily bringing in a 
set of regulations today, as you're demanding, that he and his officials 
have drawn up in their offices.  That may be better, but I'm willing to bet 
my last dollar bill that you'll get a much better set of regulations if you 
take the next few months and sit with the various sectors of the economy 
and work out joint regulations. 
 
And basically that is the commitment that we've made.  When I met with the 
tourism community -- what? -- maybe three weeks ago here in the building 
and, at that time, while they are concerned . . . To that point I will 
agree with you; obviously when there's changes made people will be 
concerned.  But I think they are satisfied with the process that we've 
established of keeping them in the loop and helping us to design the actual 
regulations as they will be implemented later. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, people in the tourism industry came 
forward and clearly indicated either by a letter or by public statement 



 

 

that they weren't pleased with the present loop, as you call it; that they 
would like to see draft, and I repeat, draft regulations -- not final 
regulations, but draft regulations -- tabled in this Assembly in public.  
Would you support them? 
 
If your major players that you deal with as the minister responsible for 
tourism, if these groups came forward and said to you, Mr. Minister, we'd 
like to see these things dealt with in a more public way because we would 
feel more comfortable as the bigger part of the business community, would 
you support them in that initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What I'm saying is that we will be bringing in 
the legislation, which is now here in the Assembly.  The minister has 
talked about certain 
 Damendments that he will be making to the piece of legislation, then 
breaking down on sectoral lines, be setting up working committees that will 
work on the regulation.  And this is a system that has worked before. 
 
And I say again, when people were demanding it last session and we worked 
out a sectoral arrangement for regulation, those regulations are working 
very, very well.  And I would be willing to say that our system of 
developing legislation as it would apply to labour law, when we come 
through the gate on labour standards and The Trade Union Act, you will see 
one of the most peaceful and best structured labour legislation, as being 
in the best interest of business and balanced to the best interest of 
labour, that you will see anywhere in Canada. 
 
This is not going to be a system that speaks to the interest only of 
business or only of labour.  It's not what governance is all about.  The 
act of governance is not as previous governments did when the political pot 
started to boil, turning over the political agenda to someone like a Grant 
Schmidt and then seeing if you couldn't rally the troops again by having 
business solidly onside and attacking labour. 
 
That's not governance; that's something else.  And I'll tell you, even 
politically the rewards of that are pretty stunning and astounding if you 
look at the result in the last provincial election here in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1145) 
 
Governance is the art and the responsibility of taking the best interest of 
all sectors of the economy into consideration and developing policy, not 
that will reflect only one opinion but trying to find a middle ground that 
both parties can live with.  And the Minister of Labour has literally had 
hundreds of meetings, not only with labour people but with business people 
as well.  And even this week, we have probably had 10 or 15 meetings with 
business people where we work one on one in developing what will be, I 
think, the best labour policy in Canada, reflecting the interest of 
business and reflecting the interest of labour. 
 
I just ask you to be patient with the process, which is one of consultation 
on the regulations, because in the end you'll have a much, much better 
system of regulations, having gone through a sectoral, consultative 



 

 

process, than the minister writing them out in his office and then imposing 
them on people here in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you know that's simply not true.  You don't 
have, you and your government don't have the -- how would I put it -- all 
the answers for this.  I mean government after government comes, Mr. 
Minister, and ministers work hard to solve problems.  I mean this is 
getting a little sanctimonious, and I didn't really want to stay here for a 
great length of time, Mr. Minister.  So you don't have all the answers and 
neither does your seat mate in this issue. 
 
But there's some real concerns here because where do you put the food 
industry, you know?  The food industry and how we develop it here has a 
direct tie to the tourism industry; a lot of products that you're talking 
about on the value added side . . . the craft industry.  You know, I mean 
if he's going to sort of cherry-pick his way through this and set . . . 
They all intertwine in this province, Mr. Minister, and you and I both know 
that.  That's a simple fact.  They do -- they intertwine. 
 
What I asked you was: if the groups that we're discussing here now, the 
people that are going to buy into the Tourism Authority, come forward in a 
public way and say to you, we are not comfortable with the process because 
we feel either, one, that it is going to ultimately hurt our business or, 
number two, we want to be part of the larger business perspective in the 
province, I just simply asked you, would you support it? 
 
And I didn't ask you about the minister coming forward with regulations 
that were cast in stone.  All I'm asking for, on behalf of these people, 
are drafts, sir.  You stamp "draft" on it and it doesn't hold you to 
anything, but it gives you a perspective of what's going on here. 
 
Would you support them if they come forward in a public way and say, we 
would like the process changed?  That's all I asked. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well in fact that's exactly what we're doing.  We 
will be working diligently over the next months.  But to believe that we 
could have the consultation done in order to get those regulations through 
the process of consultation before we write them down done before the 
legislation is passed, that's simply not possible. 
 
So you understand what you're asking for.  On the one hand on the 
legislation you said we should have done the consultation first before we 
ever brought the Bill to the House.  That was your argument on the Bill.  
Now you're saying, don't worry about the consultation.  Bring the darn 
regulations in and don't consult, just get them here. 
 
And you can't have it both ways.  Either you want us to consult before we 
do the regulations, or you don't.  And when you were talking about the Bill 
you were saying, why are you doing all these amendments?  Why weren't the 
consultations done absolutely before you brought the Bill in? 
 
And what I'm telling you is that on the regulations side this works.  
Bringing the skeleton here, the Bill here, with the principles on which 



 

 

you're going to hang the cloth, which are the regulations, you've got to do 
that here in the Assembly.  And that's what we're doing. 
 
But the regulations are much better left to be defined sectorally 
especially as it would apply to tourism where we will have likely two 
representatives from tourism, two representatives from the labour side in 
tourism, someone from the Department of Labour, sitting at many meetings 
designing a policy of regulation that would be tailor-made to that 
industry.  And it works. 
 
We have evidence that that process that was used during the last 
legislature, and then the regulations flowing out of it, are working very, 
very well. And all the predictions of the members opposite, of dire 
consequences, of dire consequences that would flow from that kind of a 
style of management consultative with the community simply haven't come to 
fruition.  In fact we have a system of occupational health and safety 
second to none anywhere in Canada. 
 
And therefore I would just urge you, in a non-political way, to be patient 
and have a belief that the system will work in this case as well.  And I 
don't want to mitigate your argument that there is concern in the industry.  
Obviously when there are changes made that might impact the bottom line of 
a tourist operator in this province -- be it a hotelier or a northern camp 
operator -- they have every right to be concerned and express interest in 
what the regulations and the Bill is going to be about, as do the trade 
unions.  I mean they have concerns and qualifications on the legislation as 
well. 
 
Nor do I believe that at the end of the day that when the Bills are passed 
through the House we're going to have universal consensus from the extremes 
in business and the extremes in labour.  Because I believe that if you did 
have the consensus of all one side or all the other, the Bill wouldn't be 
balanced properly. 
 
What you have to do is chart a course where the majority of people in 
business and labour can live with the policy, and then we will assume that 
we have had a fair, significant amount of success. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the folks out there understand some 
very basic parts of this.  And they know that this summer when they're all 
doing their tourism thing here, Mr. Minister, they're all out working, and 
your seat mate there has got a couple of them in a room and he's got a few 
folks from labour and whatever, and this House isn't in session any more, 
that their ability to cause much of a ruckus with you is gone . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, but if there's something there that's 
fundamentally flawed, if it's fundamentally flawed, then they don't have 
the same type of expectation, Mr. Minister, of this House being in session. 
 
Now you say to me, why don't we put the bones in here and then we'll put 
the clothes on it afterwards and we can't expect all that to get done in 
this session.  I agree with you totally.  You can't.  There aren't enough 
days left.  And I agree, your minister should consult.  He's got ground to 
make up for what he didn't do ahead of time.  Not you, but him.  He's got 



 

 

ground to make up here. 
 
I mean we could have a fall session.  You're the government; you can call 
this House in any time you want.  You can do that.  That's the power that 
you have. 
 
And I would think that we would want to do this right rather than do it 
wrong, cause a bunch of controversy and have to redo it again.  I mean this 
is not the type of issue -- and I agree with you -- that should be part of 
an election campaign.  It shouldn't be.  This should be done in a way that 
makes tourism one of Saskatchewan's natural strengths, which it should be.  
Because we've got all the components here; we've just never been able to 
get all the things lined up. 
 
But what I'm telling you is that there is enough concern with the process 
right now that they're not comfortable.  And they would like the 
opportunity to view these things before it's all said and done.  If that's 
too much to ask, fine.  I guess we'll have to live with it.  And you'll do 
what you're going to do and we'll have to do what we're going to do.  But I 
don't think that's a totally satisfactory process for democracy in the 
province when we're talking about the lives and the futures of so many 
people. 
 
Mr. Minister, I referred earlier to the fact that there have been some 
fairly strong objections sent forward by FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) and some of the native groups to the Authority -- not with 
the concept but sort of some of the make-up of it -- because I've also 
received letters.  And I wonder if you might comment to me about what 
you've done to rectify some of these situations, or if you feel comfortable 
with the way that the aboriginal groups will be represented in the 
Authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As it might be logical for the FSIN 
representatives, they want to make sure that there aren't any influences 
that might affect their long-standing agreements with the federal 
government who have ultimate responsibility in most of these areas.  So 
there were those kind of concerns. 
 
But I have to say their involvement was significant and they helped out in 
very many areas, and in the final process have signed off and are going to 
be one of the partners in the new Tourism Authority. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Another issue where there's been a fair bit of discussion, 
Mr. Minister, is the . . . a lot of people within the business felt that 
the Authority should reside outside of the city of Regina.  Not that one 
community was against another particularly; they just felt that they wished 
the independence, if you will, the fact that they weren't considered to be 
just another arm of government.  And I think there's been some fairly 
strong representation to you on that fact.  Is it contemplated that as this 
thing becomes more independent that it would be allowed to move outside of 
Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What we have planned to do with the Tourism 



 

 

Authority is basically depend on the board, the new board, to do site 
location.  My understanding is that there are 15 board members -- two 
appointed by government, and my understanding is, the balance by the 
industry.  And so they will be called on in the early phases of their 
mandate to choose a site location. 
 
And I think you can see that there are natural advantages that a number of 
communities around Saskatchewan have.  And while we will have our people at 
the table who will be involved in the discussion, putting forward various 
options, I think this will be very much an industry-driven decision as to 
where the headquarter or office should be located. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- As we dealt with, Mr. Minister, with the trade authority, I 
understand that there is a requirement for the new Authority to pick up 
employees from the existing department, and that all of those contracts and 
benefits and those types of packages have to go along with it. 
 
Do you see that being a requirement of the Authority, Mr. Minister, once 
they are up and running?  Will they be able to determine their own salary 
schedules, those types of things, in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, that's true; the member's right.  Both in 
the Trade Development Corporation and the Tourism Authority the employees 
will be transferred with the same package they presently have. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- How long, Mr. Minister, do you envision that that will be 
in place?  At what point will the Authority start to make those decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- This will not be an unusual situation, not unlike 
the transfer of contract or agreement of employees moving from one company 
to another.  When the contract would expire or does expire, a set of 
negotiations will go on between the employees and the management and a new 
contract will in fact be forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, will the Authority handle all of the 
promotional material, that type of thing?  Or are we going to have a split 
situation like we have with Economic Development again?  Will there be 
people involved with the Authority but people that simply stay with 
departmental staff, or is this sort of a two-pronged approach as with the 
other initiative?  Or are all the services going to be provided by the 
Authority as far as tourism development in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There'll be two areas that will stay in the 
department; one of them, provincial-federal relations which will have to be 
. . . continue to be managed through the government agency, as well as any 
capital projects that might be involved, and then of course legislative 
authority and reporting mechanisms to the Assembly.  So those main three 
areas. 
 
And I'll just read these out because you may want to . . . or they will 
appear in written form at any rate.  But the marketing of tourism will be 
one of the mandates; the provision of visitor and information services; the 
education and training of individuals involved in the tourism industry; the 



 

 

planning and development of tourism destination areas; the administration 
of tourism funding programs -- and I say again that's other than capital 
funding because that will remain in the department -- research and policy 
development in tourism; public awareness of tourism; the development and 
promotion of tourism in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1200) 
 
Now if you look at those areas, you will really find that what has happened 
up to this point is there has been that kind of development in the 
department and in the private sector.  And the joining of those two, it's 
believed, will just overall strengthen themes in development of certain 
strategic areas and sectors within tourism when both are focused very 
adamantly in the same areas. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- You brought up another area that is causing concern here, 
and that is the issue of capital projects.  And I think it's been expressed 
to you that -- I see the Crown has reserved the right to make capital 
project expenditures without regard to the Authority -- and I think it's 
been expressed to you, probably by TISASK, that that is somewhat bothersome 
because you could do this capital project and then say it's your 
responsibility, it's not ours, type of thing. 
 
And yet they don't have the leeway to determine those issues themselves.  
And we've got the issue now of two major casinos. It's up in front of city 
council in Regina, and there's going to be some internal warfare before 
they decide where that casino is going to be.  But I presume the minister, 
the Gaming minister, is probably going to expend some money, and certainly 
tourism is tied to this, and you get a big capital project somewhere 
because the government's determined that's what they want to do. 
 
And then the Authority is charged with looking after it, or responsible for 
it, but they didn't have any say in its placement and any say in its 
employees and any say in its management. And I guess what I'm asking, are 
the regulations going to provide a mechanism whereby the Authority will be 
guaranteed consultation or perhaps a veto over a major capital project?  
Are they going to have that ability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the reason the task force, as I understand 
it, recommended that the capital projects be left with the government is 
because of the oftentimes large amount of involvement with other levels of 
government, federal or municipal. 
 
I take the Poundmaker historical site, for example.  There's involvement of 
highways in terms of the road that might enter the area.  There's federal 
historic money that may flow into the project; there's municipal 
regulations that may have to change, and actually on most of the larger 
capital projects, governments are involved at every level.  And it was just 
believed by the task force and the recommendation that this would be an 
area better left with the government agency. 
 
Now as we go along here, and if it's decided by the Authority that they 
could handle it, that's something 



 

 

 Dwe could always come back and review.  Truly.  I mean there's nothing 
absolute about any of this.  It's like, in some ways, the community bond 
corporation. 
 
I really think on new legislation you should review it annually to see how 
things are working, at least in the initial phases, and we'll be doing this 
with the authority.  But initially, it was just believed that capital 
projects would work better left in the government. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can appreciate that view, Mr. Minister.  But I mean 
some of these initiatives are happening and the construction or the 
equipping of two major casinos are a fact of life.  And I know that the 
tourism industry in both Saskatoon and Regina, as they are around the 
province where they have existing casino operations, are very interested in 
the outcome of this and there could be fairly large capital expenditures 
here. 
 
And at the end of the day, whether the public is going to buy in or not buy 
in, they are a little bit worried that they may be the folks stuck looking 
after things.  And yet they had very . . . no input.  And I don't think 
even with the passage of this Bill that that Authority is going to get up 
in time to have the kind of input that they might like before the minister 
of Liquor and Gaming is off and running.  And it causes some concern out 
there as to what the proper balance should be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I can tell you quite certainly that there 
will be a great deal of advisory role by the Authority on capital projects.  
And it's very unlikely that if we were working on a capital project in one 
area of the province, that it would be going ahead without an approval 
process or at least a great deal of consultation having taken place with 
the Authority. 
 
So I say again, this could end up being a discussion for a later day, but I 
don't see it at this point as being contentious because the advisory 
committee recommended we do it this way.  And I think they based it on some 
pretty logical information that they had. 
 
Now if you or others find it to be a problem or it ends up being a problem, 
this is something we can certainly look at when we're back here next year. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the Act to 
establish the Saskatchewan Tourism Authority is indeed a welcome piece of 
legislation.  I believe strongly in the need to remove the control of 
economic development from within the reaches of government, and given the 
economic significance of tourism in Saskatchewan, I feel that this 
legislation is an important step in the right direction. 
 
While the establishment of the Tourism Authority is not exactly a 
privatization, it is devolution of the responsibilities from under the 
direct influence of the government's thumb to a more arm's length 
operation.  It will now become a separate, non-profit corporation although 
the staff of 27 people from the Economic Development department will now 
move to the Tourism Authority. 



 

 

 
It is my understanding that the Authority will be run by a board of 
directors -- and then you've been explaining that this morning -- funded by 
the government.  It is important to acknowledge the high level of 
cooperation between the players in the tourism industry and the government. 
 
To the credit of the department, the government seems to have been open to 
the industry's point of view, and that bodes well.  The potential of the 
tourism industry to contribute to our economy is almost untapped and I'm 
certain that this move to empower the Tourism Authority will be of great 
benefit to expanding that resource. 
 
There are challenges associated with this move -- downsizing of the board 
and streamlining the tremendous number of agencies with which it must deal.  
I understand that TISASK will remain separate and that it will continue 
under its current mandate.  In the long term, Mr. Chair, I believe that 
this Act to establish the Tourism Authority is a positive step for the 
province. 
 
Hopefully, a department at arm's length will be able to spend money more 
efficiently without the political interference it might experience in 
government.  I don't mean that in a partisan way, Mr. Chair, but with each 
change of administration there seems to be bumping and moving of employees 
from one department to another.  The tourism industry is an industry which 
offers a relatively easy entry level for small business and presents many 
excellent opportunities across the province.  I and the caucus are hopeful 
and confident that this move to establish the Tourism Authority will 
produce and facilitate far more ventures and successes in the economic 
sector. 
 
And now, Mr. Chair, I have some questions to pose to the minister with 
respect to the Bill.  The establishment of the Authority comes with a 
commitment from your government to provide funding.  I'm interested in the 
long-term planning by the Authority.  Will the funding for the Authority 
remain at a fixed level, for how long, and has that commitment been made to 
the Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well as you know with all grants that governments 
give, which is really what we're talking about here, this will come back to 
the Assembly each year; it will be debated.  I would expect the priority 
being given to tourism and I think you're accurate in saying the potential 
is great in tourism. 
 
It's not exactly untapped in the sense that we presently have 22,000 people 
working in that industry.  But it is a sector that we've identified as one 
of the strategic clusters as being a fast growth industry.  And if you look 
at a 10 per cent growth in that area, which is not unrealistic, over the 
next three or four or five years, you see an extra 2,000 jobs, 2,500 jobs, 
and within our strategic planning of increasing employment, this is one of 
the key areas where, as you say, small business without a lot of financing, 
or at least big financing, can get in and create employment. 
 
And regardless of whether you're in Regina or whether you live in Morse or 



 

 

whether you live in northern Saskatchewan, each area has a great deal of 
tourism potential.  It's only sort of where your mind quits imagining as to 
the limit that you would have on it. 
 
But as to the amount of money that governments will put in -- and I'm not 
speaking for myself; I'm speaking for governments in general as this 
program goes forward -- I think the fact that it is moved into a 
semi-private, semi-government organization, in some ways the funding is 
more secure.  There are no guarantees in government obviously.  I can't 
make commitments long term.  As you know, in politics that is very, very 
difficult to do. 
 
But all I can say is, if the Authority works the way that we think it will 
and the way the industry thinks it will, government will see it as an 
important tool and will continue the funding. 
 
So not to belabour the point, but first of all it's impossible for me to 
predict what this government or successive governments might do with the 
Authority.  But if it's working well, and I guess this will be the proof, 
governments would be very foolhardy to cut funding on an area where there's 
fast growth in jobs and wealth.  And therefore I would assume that 
successive ministers and department heads would look very favourably on 
recommending to government stable financing or increased financing. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- What effect will this have on the role and future of 
TISASK then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The meetings that I have had with TISASK, and I 
guess most recently, a few weeks ago in meeting with Mona Selanders and her 
staff people, is that their role does not diminish in any way; in fact, 
will act as a . . . I believe as a supplement to the Authority and another 
strong partner working in tourism in Saskatchewan. 
 
So there again I think it will be incumbent on TISASK to continue to work 
hard.  And knowing the people involved in TISASK, I have little doubt but 
that they will be around for some considerable time. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  This devolution process means that the Tourism 
Authority will inherit all of the government union staff from the director 
down.  Can you confirm just how many staff will be moving, and is my 
understanding correct on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, my understanding is that there will be 28 
staff moving and 3 staying in the department.  So the total complement is 
31; 3 staying in the department, 28 moving to the Authority. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- The Bill talks about the ability of the Authority to set 
policies about hiring, rates of pay, duties, and powers.  Does that commit 
them to working within the current agreements of employees transferred to 
them and for how long? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I mentioned to the member from Thunder Creek 
that the contracts move with the employees.  And this is not unusual 



 

 

because if you were, for example, changing the ownership of a hotel that 
was unionized, the new owner would continue on with the contract.  And when 
the contract expires, or hopefully long before the contract expires, 
discussions will go on with the employees and new arrangements will be made 
in the normal process.  So the agreements move, in fact, with the 
employees. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, how was the decision arrived at 
to leave the Tourism Authority within the purview of the Public Service 
Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The new employees will not be hired through the 
Public Service Commission.  They will be hired by the board through normal 
competition that the board will manage. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- It is also my understanding, as the result of 
consultations, that the Authority will not likely have a CEO on board for 
some months.  Can you tell me whether there will be an opportunity for the 
Authority to assess the performance of the individuals, evaluate their 
staff levels, and if necessary return any of the employees to the 
government for placement elsewhere if they do not fit in with the new CEO's 
operational plan? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, we expect that the CEO will be hired 
somewhere in the vicinity of October 1, and the employees moving, as with 
Trade Development Corporation, become employees of that organization.  
There will be no movement back and forth between the new management and the 
old management, so to speak.  They will become employees of the Tourism 
Authority and in so doing are not eligible to move back to government any 
more than they are to move to the Hotel Saskatchewan.  They become 
employees of the Tourism Authority. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Will the Authority inherit all the contingent 
liabilities for pension and benefits and collective agreements from the 
Economic Development staff that moves over to the Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, everything in fact will move.  So their 
benefits responsibilities will move, as well as payments and that that have 
in fact already been made. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Will the bumping rights also be part of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I just want to make it very clear that all the 
rights they have now within their collective agreement will be in place in 
their new work centre.  So if you're referring to bumping rights within 
their working unit, they will in fact have bumping rights within their 
working unit, within the 
 DTourism Authority. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- What restrictions might that pose if they experience 
future budget cuts? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm not sure what the question is, but it would . 
. . it's just within their contract.  If their contract has them earning a 
certain amount for a certain number of years, then they will be absolutely 
eligible for that.  It will be their responsibility of their unit to 
bargain with the new management for subsequent contracts.  And if they get 
a pay increase, it will be one that will be bargained within their unit and 
will not be, at that point, restricted to pay scales or arrangements that 
might be made again in government or within other parts of the tourism 
industry.  They will be able to bargain their own arrangement, represented 
by the same union that they presently are involved with. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- There was some discussion of this point in your previous 
questions.  The current budget of 7.3 million includes marketing programs 
and information services.  There is an additional expense of almost a 
million dollars for office, staff benefits, and warehouse space.  And 
currently Tourism is paying about $37 per square foot for office space.  
I'm wondering if the Authority will truly be an authority with the full 
power to make decisions about consolidating its offices or moving to 
cheaper accommodations.  Will the Authority have those kinds of 
decision-making powers over its own budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  As you know, the board will have the 
ultimate decision to make about location, and I just am not in a position 
to prejudge what might work best for them.  There are arguments that, I 
guess, the centre could be in other cities.  There's arguments that it 
could stay in Regina.  If it stays in Regina, there's an argument it should 
be close to the Department of Economic Development.  Others may argue it 
should be away from. 
 
And really this will be an interesting discussion at the first board 
meeting, so we'll just have to wait and watch for minutes of that meeting. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- I guess you're saying basically they have that authority. 
 
I'm interested in knowing about the level of expertise and knowledge that 
exists in the Tourism Authority.  Is this a group to which the government 
goes frequently for advice when preparing the budgets on revenues for 
tourism?  Is this a source of expertise for the government in making 
tourist-related decisions; and if so, will it continue to be consulted by 
the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well in the last couple of years this has been 
one of the, I think, very positive areas of government where the industry 
has worked very closely in conjunction with government.  And I think 
historically that is probably true, where there's been quite a good 
relationship between the industry and government. 
 
I know going back to our last term in office in the 1970s in the Blakeney 
government, it seems to me, my recollection -- although I wasn't the 
minister of Tourism -- but there seemed to a good relationship, working 
relationship between the industry and Tourism.  And I think, in recognition 
of some of the positive things done by the previous administration, for the 



 

 

most part I think that working relationship -- for example, between TISASK 
and the previous administration -- was relatively positive. 
 
There was a short period of time -- and I think the numbers on tourism 
inquiries reflect that -- around 1990 and 1991 where I think it's fair to 
say that the Tourism department got out of sync with the industry, and the 
inquiry numbers clearly indicate a great drop-off when that linkage and 
good feeling didn't exist between the government and the industry. 
 
But I think for the most part under the previous administration, all the 
optics and what I can tell about the statistics that I have in front of me 
would indicate that there was a good working relationship between 
government and the tourism industry. 
 
For the future I think the working relationship now, in my mind, has never 
been better.  And I don't say that because I'm involved.  I'm just looking 
at the numbers, and we are at an all-time record high in terms of tourism 
inquiries in this fiscal year.  And I say that because of the excellent 
work done by the industry, the members that I've listed out earlier who 
have really done yeomen's service in working towards a new relationship 
between government and industry. 
 
Will this continue?  I think it's going to get better and better as we go 
forward in the relationship between government and business if we all 
continue to talk.  Because I think, in terms of working through 
difficulties or building new systems, the art of talking to one another on 
a very, very constant basis, especially when you have difficulties -- not 
only when things are going good but especially when there's even the 
smallest difficulty, not to leave it until the end of the year or until the 
next meeting -- the idea of talking constantly to one another really remove 
the impediments that often build up between industry and government. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, was there a recommendation of the task force 
as to how many members there should be on the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, there was.  This was one of the big 
discussion points on the ministerial task force which was made up largely 
of private sector individuals, is how the board would work.  Because that I 
think was . . . One of the concerns was, how do you get a broad spectrum of 
people represented and broad enough so that you didn't have some of the 
smaller sectors simply being moved out and not represented by the 
Authority, and where the very large ones took over and represented only 
their interest.  And so the board structure was very important and that's 
why the size.  While some may argue it's too large, I think in this case it 
was very important to have that kind of representation to make sure all 
areas in fact are represented. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  I'm interested to know if there were 
recommendations about what was the best way to choose the members?  How did 
you come to the decision that the cabinet should appoint six of those 
members, and what process will be followed to ensure that these do not 
become partisan appointments? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- These appointments, you have to realize that in 
large part will come from other sectors that will be involved in tourism in 
one way or the other.  You could have someone from Parks for example, 
because the provincial parks being a big part of our tourism plan, or they 
could be from the Environment, because keeping the environment in great 
shape has a lot to do with whether or not people come to your area for 
tourism.  And so these people will be picked for their expertise. 
 
I can't imagine the advantage of having political people on this Authority 
versus having qualified people. 
 
Now I suppose you might have those times when they may overlap.  But I 
think governments appoint political people who are not qualified at their 
very own early risk.  And I just think that in terms of the Authority it 
will be unacceptable and seen to be unacceptable to appoint political 
people.  And I can assure you that that is not the intent. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  These are all the questions I had 
to pose at the time, and I appreciate your answers and the participation of 
your staff. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could, I would just take a 
moment to thank our officials who in a very able way advised us through the 
committee on these three Bills. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On behalf of the 
opposition, we'd like to thank the officials for also coming in and 
participating today and for their cooperation. 
 
(1230) 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 

1993 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6 now be read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 



 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to establish the Tourism Authority 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: -- This department has been before the Committee of Finance 
before, but the last time was some time ago and I'll ask the minister to 
reintroduce his officials to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 
introduce on my right, the deputy minister of the Department of Environment 
and Resource Management, Michael Shaw.  Behind him, the associate assistant 
deputy minister in charge of management services, Bob Blackwell; and behind 
me, the assistant deputy minister in charge of policy and programs, Mr. Les 
Cooke; and on my left, Mr. Glen Rolles, the executive director of regional 
operations. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd like to 
welcome you and your officials here today.  I know that we have discussed a 
number of times underground storage tanks -- it's a very popular issue in 
Saskatchewan -- and I think we have a few more questions today to deal with 
on this issue. 
 
A week or so ago there was a meeting up at Davidson in the evening when 
approximately 300 people were there to discuss the underground tank 
situation.  These people were called together by the Environmental Fairness 
Association, which is an organization mainly representing service station 
owners, people -- farmers, RMs (rural municipality), school boards -- that 
have underground tanks.  And they were quite concerned with this 
legislation, with the regulation involved in this piece of legislation that 
mandates them to remove underground storage tanks. 
 
Mr. Minister, when all these people gathered there, there was a number of 
your officials that also attended; but you, Mr. Minister, were not there.  
I wonder if you'd mind explaining to the people of Saskatchewan why you 
found it impossible to attend this meeting when you knew considerable time 
in advance that this meeting was taking place and that the people there 
wished to very seriously discuss the issue of the underground tanks with 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want the member opposite to know that 
I've been engaging in discussion on this topic with all concerned parties 
for a very long time.  The issues around the concerns are very largely 



 

 

regulatory.  The officials that attended heard very much the comments and 
the concerns of people there, have reported that to me, and continue to use 
the process that I have established in order to review the whole program 
that, as you I think are aware, was begun under your administration in 
1989. 
 
What I have done since taking over the ministry is established first of all 
an advisory group that recommended an action plan by which the deadlines 
for upgrading storage tanks was extended by a year, and under some 
circumstances, three years. 
 
We have established as a part of that action plan a larger advisory 
committee which is reviewing all elements of this program, and we are now 
in that process of review.  It's important for you to be aware, and for it 
to be on the record, that two of the members who are on that advisory 
committee were instrumental in gathering that group together. 
 
I am waiting for that advisory group to deal with the important issues that 
have been raised, because I want to respond as the minister to that larger 
advisory group when they have heard the issues and recommended to me what 
the program should look like.  So at this moment I'm asking the advisory 
group to hear the input, to respond to the concerns in such a way that we 
have common-sense solutions to problems that have been identified. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well it's very nice that 
there is a large advisory group put into place by your department to 
consider this.  But there was a large group of people in Davidson that 
night who wanted to talk to you. 
 
Now Mr. Shaw did a good job in his capacity as your deputy minister, but he 
was not there to answer questions of policy.  He could explain this is the 
current policy of the government.  But it's not his position to be making 
changes to that policy -- that's your job, and you weren't there to listen 
to what the people had to say.  And those people wanted to talk to the 
Minister of Environment, not his department people, but to you, sir, and no 
one else.  And you refused to go there.  I have no idea why you were hiding 
out from them, but you were. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you give the reason that you were not there that night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know if the member opposite has 
developed a hearing difficulty since the last time we met to discuss this 
issue, but as I had earlier said and I want to remind the member opposite 
again, the members opposite established the policy which is now resulting 
in a significant amount of concern, particularly by small service station 
owners. 
 
In order to address the policy's shortcomings that the member opposite and 
their administration implemented, I have established two separate advisory 
processes, one following the other:  one to establish the short-term 
strategy to try to relieve the pressure on the people who felt that they 
could not comply within the time frame set out by the members opposite; and 
then to set up an advisory committee to examine in greater detail the very 



 

 

important issues of levels of contamination, of the nature of the physical 
upgrading, the questions of when it's important for upgrading to occur, the 
questions of who pays, the question of environmental contaminated site 
liability.  These are not questions that are answerable in a day.  Those 
are questions that require broad consideration and response to the 
particular practical problems that individuals are experiencing in the 
field. 
 
I just want to, before I sit down on this, remind the member opposite that 
in his interest in his opening comment he said that rules that require 
people to dig out tanks, the only requirement to remove tanks under the 
regulations -- as the member opposite ought to know, since their 
administration introduced them -- is when they're 25 years old.  The other 
regulations are only there to provide an upgrading that allows a way of 
determining when they're leaking so that they don't cause damage and that 
determine a way of minimizing the rate of degradation of the tanks. 
 
As I have said to the member opposite already, the policy advisory group in 
action is the advisory group that has now been at work for about a year on 
which three . . . from which three members were at that meeting to hear.  
I'm not going to make any . . . I'm not going to set, first of all, a 
policy advisory group in place and then come and make policy proclamations 
as a minister out of my own instincts as I sit there. 
 
The reason that there are people put on an advisory group is because they 
have a particular interest and a particular expertise to look at the issue.  
That group has been established, the group is listening, the group is 
deliberating, and I've asked them to do their job even more quickly so that 
we can address the concerns that have been raised.  That's the way to do 
good policy changes and that's the way we'll continue to do them. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I listened very carefully the first 
time you gave your answer and I listened very carefully again the second 
time you gave your answer; and my hearing is good and I did hear what you 
said and you did not respond to the question at all. 
 
It's very nice that you have set up two committees to review this because 
it does need to be reviewed, but the people in Davidson that night wanted 
to talk to you.  They were glad that the department people were there and 
prepared to talk to them, but they wanted to talk to you -- and you were 
hiding. 
 
If there's a physical ailment here between us, Mr. Minister, I would 
suggest it's you protecting your hide.  Or perhaps it's the member from 
Riversdale trying to protect his hide by not allowing you to go out there.  
Now I'm not sure which one it is, Mr. Minister, so will you explain why you 
were not in Davidson that night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chair, I think I've answered that question twice.  
And the fact is that the . . . we're in the middle of a policy review. 
 
The advisory committee is looking at it.  The advisory committee heard.  
Members who organized the meeting are on the advisory committee.  They were 



 

 

there to hear and they will advise me when they've completed their 
deliberations. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Now, Mr. Minister, I am sure that the public of 
Saskatchewan that are observing this and I am equally sure that the 
environmental people that are concerned about the underground tanks will be 
receiving these verbatims, will see that you would not respond to the 
question of why you were not in Davidson that night. 
 
You can hide behind the fact that you have some policy people doing some 
reviews, but that doesn't make up for the fact that you were not in 
Davidson to hear directly the concerns of those people that were there that 
night.  Mr. Minister, you were simply hiding. 
 
I have a letter from a lady in Gainsborough whose service station is being 
required to do some major changes because of the underground tank 
situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could explain what studies have been done to 
determine that one part per million of gasoline in drinking water is 
unacceptable. 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I am not sure; I don't have the health 
risk studies here before me.  And I think the member opposite wouldn't 
expect that that's true. 
 
My concern would be at any time -- and I believe it ought to be a concern 
of the member opposite -- that if there is one part per million of gasoline 
in drinking water one ought to be worried about where it's coming from, 
because gasoline doesn't belong in drinking water. 
 
So the question of whether that particular level is a cause for concern or 
not, is an issue that the health researchers would have to answer and we 
can get that information for you if you desire it -- but I would be very 
concerned that one part per million of gasoline in drinking water as a 
signal that gasoline was getting into drinking water. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, because of our extensive use of 
gasoline throughout our whole society, gasoline can and does reach the 
aquifer at various points in time. 
 
Now the people who are concerned about this need to know that there is some 
valid reasons as to why a number like one part per million has been chosen 
as the level at which you now no longer have a safe environment. 
 
Is it a situation that when this was put in place that you could measure 
one part per million of gasoline in water?  And next week, because we can 
measure one part in 10 million gallons of water, that will be the number?  
And the week after that, because we can measure one part per billion, that 
will be the number?  What are the justifications for one part per million? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I hope the member opposite also sends the 
whole record of his conversation, not only to the concerned members of the 
Environmental Fairness Association, but to people who are generally 
concerned about the health of themselves and their children. 
 
I think the contention that gasoline just leaks around all over the place 
and gets into water, is such an absurd contention and it's such an absurd 
admission of what the member opposite's standards are, that he ought to be 
ashamed of himself. 
 
My goodness, if the member opposite is not concerned and in fact he would 
accuse owners . . . and I think the members of the Environmental Fairness 
Association would be offended at the notion that the member opposite would 
describe their operations as being so unmanaged as to allow gasoline to 
leak all over the place and end up in the water.  Because it is my 
observation from these people that they are concerned that their tanks 
don't leak; they don't want them to leak.  They are concerned that there is 
a public health risk.  They don't want there to be a public health risk, 
which seems to be the opposite contention than the member opposite would 
suggest. 
 
They simply are in a circumstance where they believe the regulations may 
require them to do something at a time when it may not yet be necessary, or 
that the cost of clean-up is such that they cannot bear it, recognizing 
that it ought to be cleaned up. 
 
The members of the Environmental Fairness Association to whom I've spoken 
-- and I've spoken regularly -- are concerned about environmental 
contamination.  They have contended that someone else should pay.  The 
issue of environmental contamination and who pays is the question of 
environmental contaminated site liability legislation, which we are out 
consulting on, preparing to look at for next year. 
 
This is an issue that identifies who has participated in pollution, the 
principle underlying it being that the polluter should pay.  Many of these 
people are saying we weren't the polluter but we are the present owner, now 
who should pay?  That's their concern, not the kind of lackadaisical sort 
of attitude the member opposite takes that suggests people actually want to 
accept that kind of nonsense. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the people that were at that 
meeting were concerned as to what the standards were.  If there's a leak in 
their tanks, they definitely want to put an end to it, but they also want 
to know that when you start reclaiming that soil, what's the standards?  
This letter says one part per million of gasoline.  Now what justification 
do you have for picking that number? 
 
There was a Dr. John Blatherwick that spoke at that meeting that night who 
contended that removal of this soil in a lot of cases is more harmful to 
the environment than leaving it where it is.  So when you come up with a 
number like one part per million, what justification do you have for that 
number?  Why did you pick it as opposed to some other number? 
 



 

 

Surely when you're going to have this kind of standard you're going to have 
some justification for putting that forward, Mr. Minister.  And all your 
blather about claiming we don't care about it is just hogwash, Mr. 
Minister, and you know it, because we have discussed this very seriously.  
And the people that are involved want to know where you're getting these 
numbers from and why you're using them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the rantings of the member opposite are 
interesting considering that the member opposite's party was in government 
when the standard which he is complaining about was established, and when I 
have already explained twice that we have established a review process to 
try to determine whether in fact that is still an appropriate standard.  I 
don't understand the false sort of excitement the member opposite is 
engaging in over something that he did in 1989, or his colleagues did in 
1989, and that we're now in the process of trying to change, if it in fact 
it needs to be changed. 
 
The advisory committee which I've established is looking at the basis for 
those standards that you describe.  The advisory committee is looking at 
whether or not the national guidelines that have been used by other 
provinces are appropriate in these circumstances. 
 
I don't know how many times I have to explain to the member opposite that 
the purpose of the advisory committee that I've established is to look at 
all of the regulations surrounding this to make sure that they make common 
sense from the side of the physical upgrading requirements, from the side 
of contamination levels that need to be addressed, from the side of 
contaminated-site liability. 
 
Because I can tell you the last thing that any service station owner wants 
that I've spoken to . . . and I've spoken to more than you spoke to that 
night when you were there, and I've spoken to them more often.  I've spoken 
to them with a great deal more concern and more understanding of their 
circumstances than you have, Mr. Member opposite. 
 
Their concern is they do not want to be caught in a circumstance where they 
are contributing to the kind of stuff that you would see to be acceptable, 
that somehow gasoline and drinking water -- just something that happens.  
It's not the attitude of any of them and I'm really disappointed it's the 
attitude of you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you can cry all the crocodile tears 
you want because nobody believes them. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about having an advisory committee.  Well what is 
this advisory committee studying?  Where are they getting their 
information, and what studies is that information based on?  You can't even 
give me a simple answer as to where you got one part per million.  So what 
are they studying?  Simply your political rhetoric? 
 
Mr. Minister, your answers are not acceptable to the people in this 
province who are concerned about the underground tank situation.  And you 
can go around crying your crocodile tears but the members of that 



 

 

association don't believe you.  And I have been in discussion with them a 
considerable amount, Mr. Minister, and they are not at all impressed with 
you or your attitude. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, where are you getting your information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, may I repeat that the member opposite, I 
will give him the benefit of the doubt here and believe that he knows the 
answer to the question, because the members opposite were the ones that 
established the levels the member opposite is asking about.  So I need to 
be kind and believe that the member opposite knows that those come from 
national standards and national guidelines. 
 
The question is whether those are still appropriate and applicable today, 
and that's the question which is being reviewed.  And I don't know how many 
more times I need to explain that to the member opposite.  They're being 
reviewed because there is a great deal of public concern expressed about 
the standards that the members opposite, when they were in power, put in 
place.  We're now in the process of reviewing them. 
 
I understand the concerns of the service station owners.  I have heard 
them.  I have asked the department to respond in a way that provides the 
necessary information for review.  I hope the member opposite in his 
earlier comments was not questioning the advisory committee, because the 
advisory committee includes a representative from the Environmental 
Fairness Association and from the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business and from the community in that sense.  SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) have participated in this discussion from its 
outset, and they're active participants in reviewing this because this has 
implications for them. 
 
And if the member opposite, on one day of the week in the Assembly, wants 
to talk about consultation not happening in government; and on the other 
hand saying when consultation is taking place that no, no, the minister 
should somehow overrule all of that and say no, the truth today is going to 
be this; you should stop consulting, you should actually go and tell the 
advisory committee to butt out, you're going to do it for them now.  Like 
which approach does the member opposite want to take? 
 
I've explained, I think four times, that the advisory committee is there 
for the purpose of reviewing the regulations, to try to make them 
responsive to the circumstances in Saskatchewan in 1994.  That's the job 
they're going to be doing and advising me on, and I hope the member 
opposite would like that process to continue so that we could jointly be 
advised by the best group we can be advised by. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 
 


