





























































Hansard: April 28, 1994


 

 

April 28/94 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 
pleased to be able to introduce to the Legislative Assembly today a group 
of 12 Saskatchewan students who are delegates participating in the 
interchange of Canadian studies. 
 
The interchange on Canadian studies has been an annual event since 1972 and 
this year it is being held in Corner Brook, Newfoundland, from May 1 to May 
6.  The theme of this year's conference is "Charting New Waters: Working in 
the 21st Century."  The conference program will cover areas such as 
environmental issues and the economy of the 21st century; technology and 
its impact on jobs; and native people's concerns for a better economic 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these 12 students come from farms and towns and cities across 
our province.  They were chosen at the regional level from the nominations 
put forward by high schools throughout Saskatchewan.  I'd like to introduce 
them individually at this time. 
 
In the gallery we have Derek Yasinski from Grenfell; Christy Hook, Oxbow; 
Clint Drever, Maple Creek; Carmen Holding, Gull Lake; Jordan McJannet, 
Davidson; Joni Samkoe, Regina; Jaime Lavalee, Saskatoon; Jeff Meister, 
Humboldt; Marie Christopherson, Kinistino; Carri Poncelet, Kinistino; Amber 
Arcand, North Battleford; and Amy Settee, Cumberland House. 
 
They are accompanied by Ms. Pat Ferguson, Mr. Brent Toles, and Mr. Larry 
Gray from the Department of Education, Training and Employment. 
 
The interchange of Canadian studies is recognized as a valuable program 
allowing young Canadians from all parts of Canada to meet and share their 
experiences.  I'm sure that they will be fine ambassadors on the part of 
our province.  I would ask all members in joining with me in welcoming 
these Saskatchewan young people to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you to members of the 
Assembly I wish to introduce two distinguished guests this afternoon 
sitting in your gallery.  We have with us today Mr. Vinuela, the Consul 
General of Argentina, centred out of Toronto.  And with him is Mr. Erbar, 
who is the commercial consul at the consulate of Argentina, in Toronto. 
 
While these gentlemen are in Saskatchewan, Mr. Vinuela will be meeting with 
the Lieutenant Governor and officials in the departments of Economic 
Development, Energy and Mines, and Agriculture and Food.  And he will also 



 

 

be meeting with the mayor of Regina and the officials from the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool and the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development and myself had the honour to meet with 
the delegation from Argentina last week -- Mr. Mondino, I believe it was -- 
and the representatives from the utility.  And we had a pleasurable and I 
think productive meeting with them. 
 
I look forward to meeting both of you later this afternoon and I ask all 
members of the Assembly to welcome these two distinguished gentlemen here 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join the 
Minister of Education in welcoming the interchange students to the 
Assembly; in particular Christy Hook who is from my constituency. 
 
I'd also like to introduce to yourself, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the 
Assembly, a group of seniors seated in your gallery who are here from the 
seniors' education centre at the University of Regina.  In particular, I'd 
like to ask everyone to welcome my mother and father-in-law who are seated 
in the very top row up there.  And I'd like everyone to welcome them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join in welcoming the 
seniors from the extension division of the University of Regina.  This 
group is taking classes through the university extension division.  And the 
education centre's a partnership between the Seniors' University Group Inc. 
and the university extension, University of Regina. 
 
Each year the centre provides over 80 adult education courses in Regina and 
a variety of learning programs for and with seniors.  Lorraine deMontigny, 
the director of visitor services, has been spending some time with their 
class on the history of the Saskatchewan Legislative Building, so today is 
their time to see the legislature in action. 
 
I've been over to the centre; it's just an excellent place.  I can hardly 
wait till I have time to go there. 
 
And the photo will be at 2:15 and then we'll meet after for a visit.  And 
I'm sure they'll have tough questions because they've really boned up on 
this subject. 
 
Would you join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and through you 
to members of the Assembly two guests who are residents of Saskatoon, in 
the west gallery today -- Carol Levins and Merv Hey.  Carol and Merv are 



 

 

here today for a board meeting of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation at 2 
o'clock this afternoon.  Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join with the other 
members in welcoming the seniors here today, and in particular I see my 
aunt, Rosa Morgan, from the city of Regina.  And I'd like to say hello and 
a special welcome to her.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to introduce to you 
and through you to all of my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly 25 
grade 3 and 4 students seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These students are from St. Bernadette School which is four or five stone 
throws from our house.  I'm looking forward to meeting with them and having 
a picture at 2 o'clock.  Their teacher is Ms. Marie Flegel, who may be 
known to many of us, having been with guide services for five years, I 
believe.  So no stranger to the Legislative Assembly; good to have you back 
visiting us, Ms. Flegel. 
 
Accompanying the students and teacher are parents, Ms. Chadwick, Ms. Nagy, 
Ms. Verhelst, Ms. Evans, Ms. Miller, and Mr. Schweitzer.  I ask all members 
to join me in a warm welcome to the group from St. Bernadette's. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you and through 
you to the members of this Assembly, I'd like to introduce three guests in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They have arrived from my constituency and P.A. 
(Prince Albert).  They are Heidi Obradovich, and someone special to me is 
Kim Langford, who is my daughter, and her friend Corrinne Heidel. 
 
I will be meeting with them after question period.  So would you please 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 
introduce to the Assembly this afternoon three individuals that are very 
near and dear to my heart.  And in the east gallery is my son, Dean, and 
his good wife and my daughter-in-law, Brenda. 
 
And Dean always makes a habit of coming down once or twice a session.  But 
the last time I introduced these individuals, Mr. Speaker, was almost three 
years ago, and the couple at that time was being introduced as just coming 
back from their honeymoon.  They stopped back in here and I introduced them 
as being beaming but tired. 
 
At this time however, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to also introduce the third 
member up there, and that is my granddaughter Latraca, and Latraca is a 



 

 

granddaughter that would do any grandad proud.  Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 
inform you that she knows her ABC's, can count from 1 to 20, knows all the 
colours including colours like grey and pink, and all of these kind of 
things. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just happen to have a couple of volumes of the baby 
pictures here.  If we could get the camera to zoom in I'd be glad to share 
that with you people out there as well.  But, Mr. Speaker, I know that 
that's not allowed.  You expressed interest in what I had on my desk as you 
walked by, Mr. Speaker, and I'm pleased to inform you at this time I'll be 
glad to join you in your office and we can spend a couple of hours and I'd 
be pleased to show you through all the accomplishments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, and members, to help welcome part of my 
family here. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- The only comment I could make about that is the grandmother 
must be very proud of an intelligent grandchild. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Day of Mourning for Workers Injured or Killed in the Workplace 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the official 
opposition I would like to recognize this day of mourning for those workers 
killed or injured at the place of their employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week Saskatchewan residents were stunned to hear the news 
that a farm worker was fatally injured while at his place of work.  Reports 
such as this make each of us realize how vulnerable we truly are to 
unforeseen accidents that result in injury and death. 
 
To those who have suffered the loss of a loved one, I offer my deepest and 
heartfelt sympathy, Mr. Speaker.  To those that have been fortunate enough 
to evade such a tragic experience, please take note and exercise extra care 
while on the job. 
 
Our work environment has steadily improved throughout the years.  When 
recognizing these improvements it is important to also commend employers 
who, through their own initiative, endeavour to secure the safety of their 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important day and I ask all members to join me in 
remembering the workers killed or injured across our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, as I arrived at the legislature this morning, I 
recognized that the flags on this building are flying at half-mast.  And 
that is as the result of Saskatchewan having been the first jurisdiction in 
Canada in 1988 to declare in statute that April 28 is officially a day of 



 

 

mourning for workers killed or injured on the job. 
 
April 28 is acknowledged by the Canadian Labour Congress and the Canadian 
government as a significant day in the history of Canada.  Because it was 
80 years ago, on April 28, 1914, that Canada's first workers' compensation 
program was introduced for injured workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this day we in this Assembly declare our sympathy to the 
families of Saskatchewan workers who have died or become permanently 
injured on the job.  But more importantly, on this day we in this Assembly 
pledge ourselves to continue to work toward the noble goal of becoming a 
province free of workplace fatalities and in support of occupational health 
and safety. 
 
In that regard, on this day I acknowledge the positive amendments to The 
Workers' Compensation Act and the new Occupational Health and Safety Act 
passed by this Assembly last year.  We did the right thing for the right 
reasons. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I will ask that this Assembly grant leave before 
orders of the day to continue our tradition of the past six years to 
observe a moment of silence in respect for workers and the families of 
Saskatchewan workers who have been killed or injured on the job, and to 
affirm the personal pledges of our hearts. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today also to recognize 
the annual day of mourning for Saskatchewan workers killed or injured on 
the job. 
 
Next month marks the fourth anniversary of the crane accident at the Shand 
power site that killed two workers and seriously injured seven others.  
Today the families of those that were killed, as well as the survivors and 
their families, continue to suffer. 
 
They have tried unsuccessfully to get compensation for pain and suffering.  
We must all be concerned that justice has not been carried out.  We must 
show compassion to those that have suffered and continue to suffer. 
 
Saskatchewan Liberal Member of Parliament Bernie Collins has pledged to do 
whatever he can at the provincial and federal level to ensure that both 
governments come together and deal with the issue.  I too would like to 
join the Member of Parliament and add my support to ensure that a quick 
resolution is reached to compensate the families. 
 
At this time I would also like to acknowledge on behalf of our Liberal 
caucus the many injured workers who come to us in frustration with problems 
relating to their encounters with Workers' Compensation.  Of all the 
challenges facing our constituency offices, particularly in Regina and 
Saskatoon, these are among the most difficult to bring to resolution, given 



 

 

the bureaucracy faced by workers with difficult case files. 
 
I hope that we can all commit to making improvements to the system which 
will untangle the bureaucratic web for so many of these individuals who 
find themselves at the mercy of the system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Tribute to the Salvation Army 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to recognize the work of 
the Salvation Army today as they gather in Regina and Saskatoon to 
recognize the work of their citizens' advisory boards with annual 
appreciation celebrations. 
 
The member for Regina Lake Centre yesterday went to a luncheon here in 
Saskatoon and tonight I will be at a dinner in Saskatoon.  She was in 
Regina, I was in . . . I will be in Saskatoon tonight to participate in 
these observations. 
 
Of course we're all aware of the work of the Salvation Army.  These are 
people who convert talk into action and into human service; talk about love 
into practical service in terms of the fresh air camps for needy children, 
the Sunset Lodge, for parole supervision, and second language classes -- 
these are just a few of the examples of the work of the Salvation Army. 
 
Salvation Army often deals with those people that the rest of us don't want 
to deal with very often.  They address the whole person.  And they do this 
with funds generated not from government but exclusively from their own 
fund-raising efforts. 
 
And so I'm sure that I speak on behalf of all members of the Assembly in 
expressing our appreciation and admiration for the work of the Salvation 
Army in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Onion Lake Treaty Land Entitlement Signing Ceremony 
 
Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to announce 
that the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework Agreement for the Onion Lake 
Band has been ratified and a signing ceremony will take place tomorrow, 
April 29. 
 
This brings to conclusion many long months of negotiating . . . 
negotiations rather, dealing with very complex issues.  This agreement 
would not have been possible if it were not for the cooperation, hard work, 
and leadership of the chief and council of the Onion Lake First Nation.  
Those involved in this process should be congratulated for their fine 
efforts. 
 
I feel that our government should also be commended for its cooperation and 
concern for getting this agreement ratified.  We had an obligation to 



 

 

provide Crown land to Canada under the National Resource Transfer Agreement 
and followed through on that responsibility.  We are pleased that we could 
assist in sorting out this long-outstanding treaty debt. 
 
Now that the agreement has been ratified by the members of the Onion Lake 
First Nation, they can receive settlement funds to begin purchasing land.  
The Onion Lake First Nation is entitled to 108,550 acres of additional 
reserve land, which is two and a half times greater than its current land 
base right now.  It is obvious that this will bring many benefits to the 
first nations people, not only in Onion Lake but all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased on behalf of the Minister of Justice 
and myself to be a part of the signing ceremony tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Provincial Cribbage Championship 
 
Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, an event occurred in Nipawin over the 
previous weekend which reverberated, if not around the world, at least as 
far as Woodrow and Lafleche in my constituency.  That event was the Royal 
Canadian Legion's annual provincial cribbage tournament. 
 
Two constituents and friends of mine, namely Bert Bradfield, the farmer, 
and Merv Rayner, the local co-op manager, entered the open doubles division 
of this championship.  They had won the zone contest in Coronach in 
February and followed this with victory at the district level at Abbey in 
March.  They won again at Nipawin making them provincial doubles champions 
at cribbage. 
 
Not only does that demonstrate the provincial championships can be held in 
a rural area, but also that rural residents can win it. 
 
Bert is 74 years of age, a veteran of World War II, active service and 
combat in Europe, and who can still cut the cards if not the mustard.  I 
would like to congratulate Bert and Merv on their accomplishment; and not 
only that, I wish to issue a warning, sir, to you and to anybody in this 
House who's listening.  Don't play cribbage against Bert Bradfield, sir; 
he'll beat the pants off you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Dove Case Parole Application 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, last year three individuals from the 
Whitewood area were convicted in the brutal beating death of William Dove, 
a 73-year-old man from Whitewood.  As a result of a plea bargain 
arrangement by your department, the murder charges were reduced to 
manslaughter and these three individuals received extremely light 
sentences. 



 

 

 
In fact, Mr. Minister, it has come to my attention that one of the accused, 
having received a four-year sentence, has already applied for parole after 
serving only more than a year of this sentence.  If parole is granted, he 
could be on the streets by July 12. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is unacceptable and an outrage.  What steps are your 
department taking to ensure that this parole application will receive a 
serious review and in fact be denied? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the first thing that I want to say in 
response to the hon. member's question, is that it was not a plea bargain, 
as he well knows.  It was a situation where the Crown could not prove a 
more serious charge and accepted a guilty plea which had been offered to 
it.  But there was no bargaining in the sense that the member would have 
the House believe in the way he frames his question. 
 
The second thing is that parole questions are within the jurisdiction of 
the federal government.  The Parole Board is appointed by the federal 
government and operates under federal guidelines and really has nothing to 
do with the province.  So that there is nothing I can do along the lines 
suggested by the member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I 
have been requested to write a letter to the Parole Board requesting that 
this parole application be denied.  And I will be taking a moment to write 
that letter, Mr. Minister.  And I will be making it very, very clear that I 
do not believe that any individual accused of such a violent crime should 
be released after serving just 17 months of a sentence.  I will be making 
it very clear that I feel that the justice system is failing when people 
convicted of serious crimes are put back on the street with nothing more 
than a slap on the wrist. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you join in working to ensure that parole is not 
granted?  Will you take a moment to write a letter to the Parole Board and 
talk to the federal Minister of Justice addressing this whole question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, that the member must know that 
it would not be appropriate for me and my office to write such a letter. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, Mr. Dove was killed 
because he went out of his way to offer help to individuals seeking 
assistance with a broken-down vehicle.  And then we noted the process that 
has taken place where a number of individuals received sentencing and, I 
might add, to many of the people involved and to the family, light 
sentencing. 
 



 

 

In fact it would seem, Mr. Minister, that the justice system has basically 
worked . . . done more to help people accused of crime rather than the 
innocent victim. 
 
Mr. Minister, there have been a number of questions in the last little 
while regarding the whole process of parole.  When is the justice system 
going to start protecting victims and other innocent people instead of 
violent offenders?  And what steps can be taken to ensure that individuals 
convicted of violent crime are forced to serve a more meaningful sentence 
instead of being eligible for parole after such a short period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I want to make it clear to the member and to the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that I have a great deal of sympathy for Mrs. Dove 
and the other people, his friends and neighbours who were so deeply 
affected by this senseless crime.  In no sense, do we have any . . . is it 
a question of sympathy for the perpetrators of the crime.  And as I 
explained in such detail last year to the member in estimates as well as 
during question period, the problem was the evidence was developing in such 
a way that it was quite possible that the accused people could have walked 
free.  Instead we were offered a guilty plea on manslaughter and we 
accepted that.  And the court then levied the sentence. 
 
Now as to parole, the member's political party has just finished a term of 
something like nine or ten long years as the government of this country, 
during which they could have made any changes to the parole system that the 
member might think appropriate.  But they didn't do that, and so the Parole 
Board is operating in the way that it is today. 
 
We in this Assembly have nothing to do with the operation of that board.  
Perhaps in another context in another country, these decisions would be 
made here, but under our federal system that falls within the jurisdiction 
of the federal government.  So it does the member little good to petition 
me about it.  Try the Leader of the Third Party and her contacts in Ottawa, 
and perhaps you can get your agenda achieved in that manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Labour Legislation 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today we finally see why the 
Premier and his government have brought forward two of the most backward 
labour Bills in provincial history.  We had suspected this all along but 
today it's confirmed.  Mr. Speaker, The Financial Post reports that 
Saskatchewan's Labour minister, Ned Shillington, recently introduced labour 
laws as a result of the greedy ruthlessness of business -- the greedy 
ruthlessness of business.  I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 Shillington argues that the onset of the 1980s brought about the age of 
greed and the glorification of greed. 

 
And my question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, very simply, 
do you share the backward and ignorant views of your Labour minister?  Do 
you believe that Saskatchewan business people are extremists who exhibit 



 

 

ruthless greed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to take that question 
by the hon. member to say two things.  First of all, I do not accept the 
statements or the premiss upon which that question is based, which is a 
news report that I have not seen; so therefore I do not, for the moment, 
accept this as a statement made by the Minister of Labour or by other 
members of the caucus. 
 
I have always said that the business community in the province of 
Saskatchewan -- and for that matter I think generally, but certainly in the 
province of Saskatchewan, an area I think I know best -- is the most 
innovative, most hard-working, most ingenious group of people, especially 
when they're small-business entrepreneurs on Main Street who really provide 
the jobs and the economic growth in this province.  We believe that trade 
union legislation is in effect an attempt to create a proper balance with 
respect to the interests of working men and women and those of the business 
community. 
 
The legislation is before the House.  I've said before, I repeat again: we 
shall entertain any reasonable requests for clarifications or improvements 
to the Bill as long as the objectives are achieved, and the fundamental 
objectives being ensuring that the concern for working men and women is 
protected and the economic growth opportunities of Saskatchewan are 
maintained.  And I think they can be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Premier, it's too bad 
you don't know how to answer the question, but it would be nice for the 
business community if you would.  Now you have a copy.  And much like the 
member from Regina Rosemont who sat in his chair and said, good riddance to 
business who may have to move to Alberta, the Labour minister says that the 
ones that are still here are greedy bandits. 
 
Mr. Premier, as a farmer and a small-business man, I find the Labour 
minister's comments about business insulting, and as a legislator I find 
your dictatorial approach to these Bills equally insulting. 
 
With your government's anti-business attitude, is it any wonder why your 
government is incapable of reaching any reasonable consensus with anybody? 
 
Mr. Premier, will you immediately denounce the comments made by your 
minister, ask him to apologize, and join with us in support of 
Saskatchewan's businesses so that they can create the jobs that small 
business creates throughout this province instead of doing everything that 
you can to bring them down or drive them out?  Will you do that, Mr. 
Premier; will you do that for the business people of Saskatchewan today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I've already said that I don't accept for 
a moment the fundamental assumption of the question based on whatever 
newspaper report.  I tell you, the position of the government is, as I said 
to you in the earlier answer, with respect to the capacity of the business 
community, in a province of a million people, we're all in the same boat 
together and we've got to work together. 
 
This is not a question of business versus working men and women or the 
other way around.  It isn't a question of urban versus rural.  This is a 
question of a million people who have inherited a very, very, difficult 
fiscal situation, a challenging economic climate.  And this government has 
responded. 
 
We've responded in the Partnership for Renewal paper.  We have indicated 
clearly that there would be a revision to labour laws.  We've set out a 
specific game plan for the creation of jobs.  Much more needs to be done, 
but there's some good indicators there as well.  And I think what we have 
to do is keep our eye on that ball.  I don't think it helps this House or 
the member or the official opposition opposite to continue to take every 
position of opposition to labour legislation going. 
 
For example, I was very pleased to see somebody from the opposition side 
today in members' statements get up and pay tribute to the working men and 
women injured and killed on the job.  I appreciate that; I welcome that, as 
we all do.  But I also want to tell you -- I know it's a genuine sentiment 
that you hold today -- but I recall full well how you fought tooth and nail 
the changes to The Occupational Health and Safety Act two years ago, as 
you're fighting the labour relations, Labour Standards Act and also The 
Trade Union Act tooth and nail.  Because in the eyes of the Conservatives 
and the Liberals it's Chicken Little, Chicken Little, Chicken Little, 
Chicken Little -- it's battle, confrontation; and should be cooperation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- It's like watching someone die.  Mr. Speaker, that's what 
George Bonneville said about the place where he works, the Woolco store in 
Moose Jaw.  Today, Mr. Speaker, the employees of the Moose Jaw Woolco were 
given their lay-off notices.  Mr. Bonneville said, and I quote:  We'll be 
staying open until all the merchandise is cleared out, but it's a sad 
situation -- half the store is empty. 
 
My question is to the Premier -- the Premier who is the so-called defender 
of the little guy in this province, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I want you 
to stand in your place and tell this Assembly how strengthening The Trade 
Union Act, the very reason why these employees have been served notice of 
lay-off, is going to help job creation and investment in this province.  
Could you do that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again if I may say so, I say this gently 
and respectfully, I think the opposition parties, both the Liberals and the 
Conservatives, would be very better off if they based their questions in at 
least some fact. 
 



 

 

The reality is, with respect to Moose Jaw, that the decision taken by the 
Labour Relations Board is pursuant to The Trade Union Act as it currently 
sits, unamended and unaffected by any of the proposed amendments of this 
House.  This is The Trade Union Act which you, sir, administered and were 
responsible for administration for the nine years that you were in office. 
 
It is your Act; it's an Act which requires revisions, perhaps even 
precisely for the various points that you raise with respect to Woolco.  It 
is exactly those reasons which prompt this government to take a look at the 
interests of working men and women. 
 
So it does not help anybody in this legislature or least of all the 
unfortunate people in Woolco and Moose Jaw who are affected, to get up on 
the false presumption, the false -- I won't say false because it may not be 
parliamentary -- the wrong statement, the factually wrong statement that 
the decisions taken there are somehow premissed on a Bill which is not yet 
even enacted, when he knows full well it was under your legislation, under 
your provisions of legislation and the Labour Relations Board acting under 
that old Act which we're trying to revise and modernize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you just don't get it 
and you never will.  If the legislation, Mr. Premier, that is currently in 
place denied those workers the right to decertify and have a job, then what 
your minister is proposing, sir, would guarantee that it would never happen 
ever, ever, ever. 
 
Mr. Premier, your blind promotion of the union agenda in this province; the 
inability, sir, of people to have their own self-interests as the people in 
Woolco in Moose Jaw wish to have -- they wish to have a job, sir; that was 
their self-interest, was a job -- runs counter to the fact that your union 
friends, your union leader friends who fill your political coffers with 
money, sir, for election campaigns, aren't on the same agenda as people in 
Moose Jaw who want a job.  That's the difference, sir, that you don't get. 
 
Now you tell me how the fact that these folks who are shortly going to be 
out of a job, how their union card is going to buy the groceries, pay the 
mortgage, or educate the children, sir.  That's what your Minister of 
Labour is foisting upon this province, workers without jobs who cannot pay 
their bills. 
 
Can you tell us today, Mr. Premier, how your labour legislation is going to 
give the folks in Woolco in Moose Jaw some hope.  Can you do that sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I repeat again and I would invite 
specifically, in fact I would challenge, the Leader of the Opposition to 
deny my statement. 
 
My statement is simple and it is clear: the decision taken by the Labour 
Relations Board -- whether you agree with it or disagree with it -- in the 



 

 

Moose Jaw situation is pursuant to The Trade Union Act that you, sir, 
administered for nine years.  It has nothing to do with the amendments.  
These amendments are not even law yet.  It is the old legislation. 
 
Now in the amendments which are before us, the hon. member will know or 
ought to know that there is a provision which deals with respect to 
decertification as well where there are certain circumstances that are 
taken into account.  We're examining that provision together with others, 
as you will be, as members of this Legislative Assembly, if and when we get 
. . . and when we get to the committee clause by clause, Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
But the basic fact remains unrebuttable.  That is, the unfortunate 
circumstance in Moose Jaw is the result of the old Trade Union Act.  It is 
the need to revise The Trade Union . . . not the new Act, it is the need . 
. . and the Tory Act I might say, as some of my colleagues are saying, 
because you amended it in 1983-1984. 
 
So let's just simply say that if there is any blame to be cast here, it is 
not because of our legislation, it is because of the legislation that you 
had.  And I will avoid making comments about filling coffers, about the 
unions filling our coffers; that may or may not be the case.  But I'll tell 
you, it isn't the big multinational corporations who filled your coffers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Gambling Addiction 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question this afternoon is 
for the minister in charge of Gaming.  In your March 4 release of strategy 
to help problem gamblers, your budget was set at $550,000, Mr. Minister.  
This is to include training, education, and a 1-800 hot line.  How many 
gambling addicts do you actually intend to treat within this budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the question, this 
particular question, on behalf of the government.  To say, as the minister 
has said and as the government repeatedly said, we will be establishing, 
and are establishing as quickly as we can, the appropriate assistance with 
respect to problem gamblers. 
 
There are a variety of estimates with respect to the level of problem 
gamblers.  They are in statistical terms relatively small, but I don't hang 
my hat on that.  Whether statistically it's small or not, the reality is 
you have to deal with these people as you do in other illness circumstances 
as best as you can.  And I think once the program is fully established and 
we're able to measure, we'll know the impact of this. 
 
But the reason that I want to add to is the question of casino and the 
position of the Liberal Leader in this regard. 
 
The new executive director of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan is one Mr. 
Emmet Reidy.  Now Mr. Emmet Reidy in 1988 -- and so far as I know to this 
current date -- has been a strong proponent of casinos.  Moose Jaw 



 

 

Times-Herald, 1988, says this, referring to Mr. Reidy.  Quote: 
 

 The opportunities (referring to a casino) such an attraction create are 
endless.  And most of them will be the tourist, hospitality, and retail 
sector which provides jobs for our young people in particular, he said. 

 
 "What we want is to bring a world-class casino to Moose Jaw." 
 

I can give you other examples. 
 
Now this is the person who runs your Liberal Party.  I want you to tell the 
House:  is the Liberal Party for casinos or against casinos?  Are you with 
Mr. Reidy or are you on some other agenda?  Where do you stand and what's 
your policy with respect to problem gambling? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- It's a pleasure, Mr. Premier, that you are finally 
answering some questions in this House.  On February 24, your minister in 
charge of Gaming agreed with the government study, Mr. Premier, that showed 
levels of gambling addiction at over 20,000 Saskatchewan adults, based on 
the current levels of gaming.  It costs $10,000 for a 30-day rehabilitation 
program for a gambling addict to be treated in South Dakota, Mr. Premier. 
 
To treat gambling addiction, your government, your minister, has set aside 
a mere 1 per cent of all the gambling profits that you say you're going to 
get.  If you spend every penny of the 1 per cent directly for treatment, 
that would mean less than $22 per addict for treatment, Mr. Premier.  Now 
$22 will buy some Neo-Citran, a bottle of Aspirin and some Kleenex -- 
reasonable treatment for the common cold perhaps, Mr. Premier, but hardly a 
cure for pathological addiction to gambling. 
 
Mr. Minister, what kind of treatment do you plan -- or Mr. Premier -- to 
offer at $22 per person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to allow the Liberal 
Leader to escape this question period today without telling the Legislative 
Assembly where she stands on the issue of casinos and gambling. 
 
She's already admitted to being a direct owner in a racehorse; we know that 
to be the case.  We know that her executive assistants and her family -- I 
don't condemn them -- are involved in bingos, or were involved bingos.  We 
know that her chief executive officer, who runs the Liberal Party, is and 
was a strong advocate of casinos. 
 
Now you get up and tell us in this House whether you are for those 
operations.  If the answer is yes and the argument is that the support for 
problem gamblers is not enough, then we can talk about this matter in an 
intelligent way. 
 
You cannot walk both sides of the street.  You cannot take the position 
that you're against it because of problem gamblers, but you might be for it 
because everything in your party and your chief executive officers say that 



 

 

you should be for it. 
 
You tell us where you're at on this main issue. Then if you think that the 
problem gamblers is not enough, we're prepared to sit down with you and 
anybody else in this Assembly or in Saskatchewan to work out the 
appropriate problems. 
 
Where do you stand?  Come clean now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  After 27 long years in 
government, Mr. Premier, I'm sure that you recognize that question period 
is for you to answer the questions.  And the problem with your government 
is that it's blinded by greed.  That is the problem.  You want the money 
from gambling profits but you won't take the responsibility that goes along 
with it. 
 
The Associate Minister of Health, your Associate Minister of Health, 
indicated that in Saskatchewan, and I quote him directly, sir: Considerable 
expertise already exists in the field of problem gambling, both within and 
outside government.  End of quote. 
 
Mr. Premier, the fact is that gambling addiction requires specialized 
treatment.  And the fact is that to date only three Saskatchewan people 
have been sent to Minnesota for one-week training courses.  The problem is 
that your program is going to fund three jobs for gambling addictions 
workers at up to $40,000 a person.  And your recent job ad doesn't even 
require experience or training in gambling addictions. 
 
Given that your program has no fully trained counsellors in gambling 
addictions and your funding is absurdly inadequate, why should the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan have any confidence in your treatment 
program? 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Before I let the Premier answer, I want to again 
reiterate to members who are in close proximity of the questioner to please 
not interrupt while the questioner is asking the question.  If members 
don't heed to that warning I'm going to start naming some of those members.  
I've done so in the past. I've warned some members three or four times; 
they don't seem to pay any heed. And I'm warning those members for the last 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the Liberal Party says 
that question period is not a period where she has to answer any questions.  
She is technically right about that, but the reality is that in order to 
give her questions credibility, she owes it as a duty to this legislature, 
as a duty, to tell us the basic, fundamental policy upon which the 
questions are predicated. 
 
Because if you say there should be no casinos, no gambling, no 
horse-racing, that you deny Mr. Reidy's position, you deny Mr. Houston's 
position, you deny Premier Savage's position in Nova Scotia -- Liberal -- 



 

 

opening two casinos, end of issue.  Your problem with respect to problem 
gamblers is gone.  Because if that's your policy when you get elected to 
office, there will be none of that.  There will be none of that and 
therefore no problem gamblers. 
 
Now that's the first thing, that you've got to do this.  When is going to 
be about 25 years from now -- that's when it's going to be when.  Yes.  And 
the polls show the same thing and the member knows it as well. 
 
But I don't care even if it's tomorrow if you come in; I don't care if it's 
tomorrow.  Tell us where you're at.  Because if you're against all of that, 
then you've got the problem gamblers' problem solved. 
 
But you won't.  You ride both sides of the fence.  You walk both sides of 
the street. 
 
Where does Mr. Savage get off in Nova Scotia on helping the problem 
gamblers?  What does Mr. Reidy say about problem gamblers?  That is the key 
issue. 
 
And I say to the Leader of the Liberal Party, you are being totally 
misleading, you are playing old-style politics of the worst case, and you 
are not telling the people of Saskatchewan the truth. 
 
I challenge you: are you for casinos and gambling?  Yes or no.  Tell us 
once and for all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Woolco Decertification Vote 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Premier.  
Mr. Premier, the question of judges' salary has recently come up in this 
province.  Less than 50 judges were concerned I believe, Mr. Premier, and 
your Minister of Justice stood in this House and he said there is the law 
and then there is justice -- there is the law and then there is justice. 
 
Mr. Premier, I was talking about 140 people, not 40 as in the case of 
judges, 140 people in the city of Moose Jaw with a payroll running in the 
millions, sir, in the millions; far more than what we were talking about 
with your judges. 
 
Your personally appointed Labour Relations Board denied them the right of a 
free vote, Mr. Premier.  There is law and then there is justice.  Maybe you 
should have your hand-picked board give these people some justice under the 
old rules, Mr. Premier.  Would you do that for them then? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the House and the 
public to note what is behind this question.  And by the way I will say, 
watching question period the last several days, disturbingly, as a pattern 
behind the Conservatives, a series of questions of this nature.  It came up 



 

 

with Elbow yesterday.  It keeps on coming up. 
 
The implication and the fundamental assumption behind that question is that 
a quasi-judicial tribunal established by law to administer the law, such as 
it is -- your law, your Trade Union Act -- when the decision is not right, 
even if it's our board, that it should be the politicians who come in and 
substitute their decision for those tribunals.  That's a position.  That's 
what you say. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if any premier or government was to 
acquiesce to that position -- there are many decisions I accept; there are 
many I do not accept -- but if we were ever to acquiesce to a situation by 
political fiat, you would write the laws based on individual circumstances, 
then I tell you, you are into a circumstance of total anarchy and political 
patronage gone wild. 
 
Mind you, following the nine-year history of the Conservatives opposite, I 
know exactly where those old-style politicians are coming from, but I don't 
buy it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, it has been a tradition of this House for the 
past six years on April 28, out of respect for the families and the 
Saskatchewan workers who have been killed or injured on the job, to observe 
a moment of silence in this Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, I request leave of 
the Assembly to observe a moment of silence once again this year. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 22 grade 9 
through grade 12 students from the Coderre School, and they are situated in 
the east gallery today, Mr. Speaker.  They are in visiting the Legislative 
Assembly and other areas around Regina. 
 
Today they are accompanied by their teachers, Arvid Luhning, Cleo Fleury, 
chaperon Darren Johnson, and bus driver Daniel Brin. 
 
I will be having the opportunity to meet with the students after question 
period and allow them to grill me on what they've seen here today, Mr. 
Speaker.  So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming the 
students from Coderre, Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act and to enact 
certain other provisions 
 
The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Justice to introduce his officials 
to the members of the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Beside me is Brent Cotter, who 
is the deputy minister.  Behind Mr. Cotter is Ron Hewitt, the assistant 
deputy minister of registry services, and behind me is Doug Moen, the 
executive director of public law and policy. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, it was interesting . . 
. first of all, welcome to the minister and his officials joining us this 
afternoon.  Looks like he's got some hard-hitters with him and I think 
he'll need them once we get into this Bill.  But, Mr. Chairman, it was 
interesting listening to the debate in the Assembly this afternoon when my 
colleague, the member from Thunder Creek, raised the question of employees 
at Woolco in Moose Jaw and also reminded the Premier of some strong 
arguments his Minister of Justice had indicated regarding law and justice.  
And then the Premier stood up and indicated that it wouldn't be appropriate 
to change any of the laws or rules regarding the Labour Relations Board. 
 
And yet, Mr. Chairman, as we've noticed over the past few years, we've seen 
that there have been numerous occasions where the government has chosen and 
followed a route that basically if their legislation didn't quite fit in 
with their goals, they've turned around and, as on occasion, Mr. Speaker, 
changed the laws.  And then the most hideous thing is they've retroactively 
changed the laws. 
 
And we saw this regarding the Crown employees' contracts.  We've seen this 
regarding individual contracts with farmers and GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program).  We've seen what happened with the NewGrade heavy oil 
upgrader issue, and now the judges.  And as one newspaper column indicated: 
who's next? 
 
And those are some of the questions that we want to raise with the 
minister, because I think it's very important that we establish who really 
is responsible; who is the law in this province; who gives the law and 
administers the law. 
 
And I think, Mr. Chairman, the one thing that we need to raise -- and I go 
back to the discussion the last time this Bill was before the House -- the 



 

 

minister continually argues that this had nothing to do with law and order; 
that basically it was at an agreement, or an increase in salaries that the 
government couldn't live with.  And I guess the most interesting comment 
was that, and I quote: this is not a question of politics, Mr. Speaker.  At 
no point was this a question of politics. 
 
Now I would have to disagree with that, Mr. Chairman.  Because I think when 
you look at the minister's comments, just a little further down, he says: 
for that reason -- he's talking about the decision that was made -- and for 
that reason, Mr. Speaker, my party really believes in government. My party 
believes that government is the instrumentality by which so many of 
society's problems can be addressed and by which the human condition can be 
advanced.  And he was . . . I think what he was trying to tell us, that it 
was the responsibility of government to make some of the serious decisions, 
and at the end of the day, the decision rested with them. 
 
And I think as we look at the Bill before us, in that case then the 
minister should have given some serious thought -- Executive Council and 
the government -- before they even brought forward the legislation in the 
first place, and made the decision, the difficult decision that had to 
made, rather than bringing forward a piece of legislation establishing a 
commission which at the end of the day they realized they couldn't live 
with. 
 
And I begin to wonder if they weren't aware of the problems that might be 
associated.  And I think we had a lot of discussion on that when the 
original Bill was brought forward. 
 
But coming back to the politics side of it, I would have to argue that the 
minister . . . for the minister to say that this wasn't politics . . . When 
the minister stands up and says, we couldn't live with 24 per cent.  Why 
couldn't he live with 24 per cent, or 24 per cent over six years, which was 
4 per cent on annual basis.  But the minister relates it to, oh as if it's 
a 24 per cent increase on an individual or one-year basis. 
 
And the minister said, we've been working towards building a consensus, a 
consensus whereby many people in the province of Saskatchewan have accepted 
very minimal wage increases.  And on that basis then we couldn't accept 
this. 
 
Well if that isn't politics I don't know exactly what it is, because, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister was aware of what had been taking place.  And there's 
no doubt in my mind that the minister in his office was probably getting a 
lot of letters.  We had a lot of letters in our office regarding the whole 
question, regarding the increase to the judges.  We also have been 
receiving a number of letters where people have been looking at the other 
side, and that avenue of law and order and justice has been coming through 
from people. 
 
And so when you look at the whole principle of the Act that we have before 
us, it seems to me we have two views here we must be very mindful of.  
Number one, yes, people across this province, in fact the farming and 
business community for a number of years, through the '80s, have been 



 

 

facing some very difficult times.  And there have been some difficult 
decisions that have to be made.  But they've made their decisions based on 
the principles that they had to work with on a daily basis. 
 
Certainly the public sector across this province has seen that there's some 
difficult decisions they've had to meet.  I would even suggest that labour 
isn't totally happy with a lot of the decisions, certainly the decisions 
made prior to 1991.  And on some basis, since 1991, they haven't been 
totally happy with everything the government has done, although we find 
that they're speaking out against the government has certainly backed off 
since The Labour Standards and The Trade Union Act have been brought before 
this Assembly. 
 
But what I would say, Mr. Chairman, that what we have before us is a piece 
of legislation that goes against all the fundamental principles of law.  
And I think on that basis we must ask the minister why the government chose 
to take this route in the first place, knowing the hazards that may arise, 
that may be out there, in the implementation, number one, in bringing 
forward a piece of legislation calling for a commission, and a commission 
that would make recommendations that would be binding. 
 
And I would like to know, Mr. Minister, in light of a number of the things 
that I've raised today: why did the government, why did your government 
choose to bring forward the original legislation?  Because I'm sure there 
must have been a lot of questions and concerns in your mind, even upon the 
introduction of that legislation. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the member raises a number of points that 
I would like to address in response.  And I'll begin at the beginning of 
his remarks.  My understanding of the Premier's answers during question 
period was that The Trade Union Act needed change and hence we have a Bill 
before this legislature to change the Act.  Now I don't think we need 
repeat the exchange that took place but clearly it was a matter there of 
adapting the trade union law to modern circumstances and modern conditions 
and modern problems. 
 
On the second point, which was the question of whether politics had played 
any part in the decision, I guess it depends upon how you define politics.  
In a broad sense of course all of the public issues that we deal with in 
this legislation are politics.  It is the study of public issues and the 
attempts to resolve public issues that is the essence of politics. 
 
But I want to say to the member this: the point I was addressing when I 
made the remarks that he quoted is that the popularity of the decision was 
not something that drove this exercise.  It was not the determining factor 
by any means.  Politics was not the decisive factor.  We had no way of 
knowing what the political reaction would be to a decision one way or the 
other. 
 
There is a powerful argument on each side, on each of the two principles 
involved here.  And people have to make up their mind according to that.  



 

 

On the one hand you have the very important principle that governments act 
in accordance with the law and in accordance with their agreement.  On the 
other hand you have the dilemma that we have in Saskatchewan caused by our 
debt and our deficit. 
 
And I spoke at some length in the House and outside the House about the 
consensus that we had been able to establish during our two and a half 
years of government around the principle of restraint and around the 
principle of eliminating the deficit and putting the finances of this 
province back on a solid footing.  That consensus exists and we are 
grateful to all Saskatchewan people for it.  Everybody's chipping in, 
everybody's doing their share, everybody is sacrificing, and it is working 
-- it is working. 
 
The risk posed by the award of the commission with respect to judges' 
salaries is that if we had accepted it, it could easily have destroyed that 
consensus.  It could have easily destroyed the fragile consensus that we 
have built around the idea of restraint and deficit elimination, and we 
were not prepared to risk that -- we were not prepared to risk that. 
 
As we saw it, as we looked across the piece, across the things that 
government does in this province, it wasn't just a question of wages, 
although that was one of the things, because we've been pretty tough, we've 
been pretty tough on the wage front.  And the workers in the public sector 
in Saskatchewan have sacrificed a great deal by accepting the wage package 
that we negotiated during the last round of collective agreements. 
 
But it goes beyond that.  It applies to everyone, every organization, every 
municipality who is in receipt of government funding, government grants, 
payments of one sort or another, all of which, I think, all of which have 
been affected.  At least the vast majority have been affected by our 
restraint measures since this government came to office.  And it was that 
entire community out there, wage-earners, municipalities, grant recipients 
of every nature and kind, who form part of this consensus. 
 
Each one of those has a case to make.  Each one of those groups believes 
that their case is just as good as, if not better than, the judges.  And if 
we were to make an exception, as we would have to make in the case of the 
judges' award, and allow that, then as we saw it there was just no end to 
the demands that would be made upon us.  Group after group, individual 
after individual, would be coming to us saying, now just what's going on 
here?  If you can make an exception in the case of the judges, then you can 
make an exception in our case.  And that was the concern that we had as we 
were debating this matter. 
 
Now the third question, Mr. Chair, was why the government passed this 
legislation in the first place. And you have to really go back behind that 
and say why did we make this agreement in the first place.  And that is 
also a matter that I have addressed inside the House and outside the House. 
 
The judges approached the government shortly after the election and what 
their approach was, was that they wanted the Schmeiser report, delivered to 
the then Justice Minister Lane, back in the previous administration, they 



 

 

wanted that report implemented.  It provided for a 14 per cent increase. 
 
We said to them, we can't afford a 14 per cent increase; we can't afford 
anything like it.  And the negotiations proceeded from there. 
 
Eventually we concluded that the previous award, the so-called Schmeiser 
award, would be just forgotten about.  We would just not implement that at 
all; it would just be put on the shelf and forgotten.  And we would have a 
new process involving a new commission to look at the question of judges' 
salaries. 
 
Now in order to put that package together, in order to make that deal 
effective, we had to agree with the judges that the result would be 
binding.  We did it in the expectation -- and I freely say this to the 
House, as I have here before and outside -- never dreaming that we would 
get the kind of award that we got. 
 
We thought we would get an award that was in line with the circumstances 
and conditions that exist in this province.  And that was a mistake.  That 
was a mistake.  I've acknowledged it in this House; I acknowledged it 
outside this House.  The government has acknowledged it -- it was a 
mistake. 
 
And so we have to accept the consequences of that.  We've got people 
criticizing us for making that mistake. Fair enough. I admit it. And then . 
. . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Now you're making a bigger mistake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member says now we're making a bigger mistake.  
Now I have to address that.  That keeps me on my feet for another few 
minutes here. 
 
We then were faced with this award of 24 per cent over three years and we 
decided we couldn't pay it.  Well then, what are you going to do?  You 
can't just not pay it.  You have to take some steps because we're bound by 
statute to pay it.  And we're bound by our agreement to pay it. 
 
So we had to bring a Bill to this legislature.  Having made that decision, 
we had no choice but to go back and make the changes that were made in this 
Bill.  While we were at it, we cleaned up the mistake that we made about 
agreeing to the process in the first place -- simply saying that process no 
longer applies.  And that flows just naturally from the decision that we 
made with respect to the award. 
 
I don't regard it as a mistake.  The mistake, Mr. Chair, the mistake was in 
agreeing to the process in the first place.  We ought to have . . . I don't 
know how we could have anticipated what award might come down but in 
retrospect, with the perfect vision that one has from the perspective of 
hindsight, we should have anticipated that an award like this was possible 
and taken some safety-valve measures and built them into the statute. 
 
I doubt whether we could have got agreement on that from the judges.  That 



 

 

was certainly not their approach.  But with the benefit of hindsight, 
that's what we should have done.  That's where the mistake was made.  
Having made that mistake, that's the one that we have to now correct, and I 
don't regard the correction of that mistake as being a further mistake. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I guess 
from the discussion that you've initiated, I'd like to ask you what you 
gave as terms of reference for the commission when you set that up so that 
you decided that this was a good thing to do.  Did you give them the terms 
of reference in relation to the restrictions and the qualifications? 
 
You gave the commission that dealt with the boundaries of this province 
some very, very, very, very restrictive conditions to consider.  What did 
you give as conditions for the commission to have for terms of reference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The terms of reference, Mr. Chair, were set out in 
the legislation which was Bill 88 of last year, of 1993.  And in section 
5.1 which was enacted by that legislation, the terms of reference were as 
follows: 
 

 The commission: 
 
 (a) shall inquire into and make recommendations for the three-year period 

commencing on April 1 of the year the commission is established with 
respect to (a number of matters) . . . 

 
I'm just trying to interpret the legislation that I have here.  I'm sorry 
for this delay but I'm just trying to clarify . . . 
 
My officials have . . . this is why we have officials here to assist the 
committee, the minister more particularly.  Yes, I was saying make 
recommendations with respect to the salary paid to the chief judge, to the 
associate chief judge, to any other judge, and the remuneration for 
administrative duties, and the northern allowance, and the professional 
allowance, and vacation leave. 
 
And we also mandated the commission to inquire into and make 
recommendations with respect to support staff, facilities, equipment, and 
security of the court, and the benefits to be provided to judges.  This was 
the mandate.  There were no limitations placed on it. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  While we're waiting for 
the Justice critic, to get back on the issue that he raised with the 
minister this afternoon during question period about the Dove case, we want 
to pick up on that same theme, I think, that the minister was just talking 
about when he said, we made a mistake.  And I must fess up that I was the 
one that said yes, but you are going to be making a bigger mistake with 
this legislation. 
 
And I want to pick up on that theme a little bit, Mr. Minister.  Because I 
don't think that while admitting that you made a mistake, which is 
admirable quality, but that does not justify you in making a bigger mistake 
to rectify your original one.  Because what you're doing, Mr. Minister, is 



 

 

compounding the issue and the mistakes that are being made. 
 
I'm going to ask you a relatively simple question because this is, in a 
nutshell, how I'm beginning to feel about you and your government.  And it 
is this: you are a strong proponent, obviously, of the saying that the end 
justifies the means.  Because your actions have supported that premiss over 
the last couple of years -- the end justifies whatever means you have to 
pursue in order to accomplish that objective. 
 
Now I'm convinced of that, Mr. Minister, because if I take a look at your 
record over the last number of years, almost exclusively it revolves around 
one component and that is, namely, money.  Money seems to be what is 
driving your government -- the deficit. 
 
Now I recognize that the restraints imposed, the fiscal restraints imposed 
on any government of this time is rather strenuous.  And I understand also 
the machinations that you and your government and Finance ministers go 
through to make the deficit look tremendously great -- the debt perhaps 
would be a better word, the accumulated debt -- so you can show the 
province how you've managed and how you've handled and how you've grasped 
and grappled and wrestled that monster to the ground in time for the next 
election. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I believe fundamentally that you are making a mistake by 
hanging your electoral success on that almighty dollar.  And what I'm 
premissing my remarks on is your track record of dealing with money-related 
issues and the justice-related issues. 
 DBecause I can go back to the original problem that you had that cost the 
minister of Agriculture his job, which is the GRIP issue where you said 
it's too expensive; we can't afford it; so therefore even though we made 
60,000 contracts with the farmers of this province, that is not 
significant.  The significant thing is that it's going to cost us too much 
money so we will change those contracts; we will deem that that letter was 
sent out informing the farmers of the change even though everybody knows, 
and you recognize as well, that there was no letter sent out in compliance 
with the regulations, in compliance with the law, in compliance with the 
contract.  You overrode all of those things and just simply said, that 
contract is not significant. 
 
We have the personal services contracts of members of the government when 
you took over, and you overrode that and say, well we can't afford it 
because it's too expensive; these contracts are too expensive, so therefore 
we're going to renegotiate them, we're not going to have anything to do 
with them. 
 
(1445) 
 
Then you have embarked upon an attack on the cooperative movement in this 
province and said, the upgrader in Regina here, that's not a good deal for 
the citizens of this province.  And so under threat of legislation, you 
cause them to bow under as well. 
 
We take a look further, Mr. Minister -- and I'm just citing examples that 



 

 

come to my mind right now -- and the next one that comes to mind is an 
issue that the member of the third party brought up today and that is the 
gambling in this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 
minister says the critic of Justice is back now, but I'm on a roll here, 
Mr. Minister, so just be patient. 
 
The other issue is the issue of the gambling dollar.  And again I go back 
and say, you folks over there have got dollar signs in your eyes, and any 
action that you contemplate is predicated on money.  Now that's important, 
it's significant, and I'm not downplaying the essence of it. But I'm 
certainly not putting it on the pedestal that you are, where the end 
justifies the means.  And that's what I'm coming back to, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now the concomitant question that I would like to ask you with the end 
justifying the means is the example of Woolco.  There's money involved 
there, but it happens not to be government money with the employees at 
Woolco that today got their walking papers.  Now the reason that culminated 
in that type of fiasco there is simply because of you and your Premier's 
hand-picked Labour Relations Board that made that decision.  That's 
fundamentally the cause of it. 
 
Now you have it within your mandate, you have it within your power. If 
you're going to break laws, if you're going to change laws to suit the end 
that you're trying to accomplish, why couldn't you have saved those 140 
jobs in Moose Jaw with simply with a stroke of the pen, if it was your 
will, if it was your desire? 
 
But no, unfortunately this time you had ideological barriers to doing this 
come to play, and then your labour union friends and the labour union 
leaders are the ones that are calling the shot, and the Minister of Labour 
jumps to the tune all the time.  So I think if you wanted to at least be 
justified in what you're doing, then go a step beyond and actually help out 
some of the people of this province, Mr. Minister. 
 
So unless I'm wrong, I have made this conclusion: that if your end needs 
something done to accomplish that objective, the end justifies the means -- 
any means.  Is that not correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Chair, it is not. 
 
The member is correct when he talks about the importance of the debt and 
the deficit situation in this province, and he is correct when he says . . 
. summarizes our priorities by saying that control of the deficit has been 
the major priority of this government.  And there is just no question about 
that.  We have explained that in this House times without number, as we 
have the length and breadth of this province and indeed this nation. 
 
And we do that because we believe only by getting the fiscal situation in 
this province under control will the people of this province have any 
future worthy of the name.  And if we don't get this under control, then we 
have done an enormous disservice to our children and to the member's 
grandchild who was in the gallery today.  For her sake we have to get on 
top of this problem. 



 

 

 
So the member is correct that this has been a major priority of this 
government.  But that does not mean that the end justifies the means.  And 
I don't think that that's a fair charge.  I think the member, in his 
recollection over events of the two and a half years, has made a wrong 
conclusion when he suggests that. 
 
Now I know he regards it as his political function to make that sort of a 
statement, and I understand why he does that and I accept it within that 
framework.  But the fact of the matter is that that is not the case. 
 
I tried to explain in the House, and I think that the members understood 
what I was saying, the importance of the principle that governments are 
bound by their legislation and by their agreements.  And I said that only 
in extreme circumstances could you justify a departure from that general 
principle. 
 
I said, and I say again, that the circumstances surrounding this particular 
award constituted those kinds of extreme circumstances.  The award of the 
commission was, by any test that is relevant to our fiscal situation in 
Saskatchewan, unconscionable -- unconscionable. 
 
You simply can't pay that kind of award and do what we have been doing 
across the piece with the municipalities, urban and rural; with the health 
care system; with all kinds of non-government organizations who depend upon 
government funding for their existence; for all of the people who work for 
government or are in receipt of any of their livelihood or the operations 
of their programs and they're relying upon provincial government money.  We 
just simply couldn't pay it, in all conscience.  And that constituted the 
kind of extreme circumstances that just drove us to the conclusion that we 
could not accept it.  The risks of accepting it were too great. 
 
Having made that decision, then there was only one thing to do and that is 
what we are doing in this Bill.  To reach back and fix the law.  Change the 
law in such a way that the award would be ineffective. 
 
Now we're not prepared to pay it, and it's as simple as that.  And that's 
the question you have to ask yourself, am I going to pay this award or not?  
If you decide not to, then you have to do what this Bill does. 
 
Now just let me touch on the Woolco matter before sitting down.  There's 
been a lot of criticism from the opposition directed mostly at the minister 
for reasons that I can't understand.  As the Premier indicated in his 
answers today, he can't understand it either.  It's not the minister who 
directs the Labour Relations Board.  Members opposite know that -- members 
opposite know that. 
 
The board is appointed -- and that has been the case for the last 50 years 
in this province -- labour relations boards have been appointed and they 
have operated free from political control.  So it's not the minister who 
can fix it nor is it the Premier who can fix it. 
 
But I want to raise this question: isn't it strange that in all those 



 

 

questions that have been hurled across the floor at the minister, not once 
has it been mentioned that it is the Wal-Mart company that decided it 
wasn't going to buy the Moose Jaw plant and operate it as a store because 
it was subject to a certification order certifying a trade union as the 
bargaining agent for the employees in that store. 
 
All they had done -- all they had done in that store in Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Chair -- is to exercise a right that they have under The Trade Union Act 
and a right that they have under the constitution of this country.  That's 
all they had done. 
 
And it is the Wal-Mart store who said, we will not buy any store that is 
organized.  We will not buy any store that is subject to a certification 
order.  There wasn't even a collective agreement in Moose Jaw, not even a 
collective agreement.  They could have come in and paid whatever they pay.  
And then . . . And the fact is that it was the Wal-Mart decision, the 
Wal-Mart decision that closed the store. 
 
What does this tell you about that company?  Not prepared to recognize that 
employees have a legal and a constitutional right to do what they have done 
and to close a store on that ground.  Now you'd think that that factor 
could have been a part of the questioning from the opposition, rather than 
to go after the minister who they know has no power to affect this 
situation. 
 
There are procedures established in this province for the certification and 
the decertification of trade unions.  They are not different in principle 
from the provisions of every other jurisdiction in this province, 
provincial and federal.  It is pretty much the same right across the piece.  
In every province it is administered by a board similar to our Labour 
Relations Board.  That is common throughout the country. 
 
The decertification application that was made failed on grounds that would 
have failed anywhere, anywhere in this country.  It's not just a product of 
this particular Labour Relations Board.  It is an application that would 
have failed anywhere. 
 
So not only is it unfair to attack this minister for a decision which is in 
no way his, but it is unfair to attack the Labour Relations Board in 
respect of a decision which would have been made anywhere. 
 
The Chair: -- Order, order.  The item before us is clause 1 of Bill No. 46.  
And it is the tradition of this House to allow a fair amount of latitude in 
the questioning and responding to questions, and the Chair does recognize 
that.  By way of example, a question was raised and that was responded to. 
 
But I do want to caution all members that the Bill before us is Bill 46, An 
Act to amend The Provincial Court Act and to enact certain other 
provisions, and to direct their scrutiny of the Bill to the subject of the 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I certainly 
thank the minister for his response because certainly his response has just 



 

 

added some more wood to the fire . . . fuel to the fire, I guess, if you 
will. 
 
Now when we look, and respecting your ruling, Mr. Chair, I must indicate 
that the whole argument about the Wal-Mart case can be directly related to 
the debate that's taking place in the House right now.  The Minister of 
Justice had indicated at one time in this House that there was law and 
there was justice. 
 
Now his argument that it isn't fair . . . that the government has the right 
to change the law regarding the judges, but at the same time when it comes 
to the Labour Relations Board all of a sudden now, no, they will not accept 
the right to give or accept the responsibility of giving the employees at 
Woolco the opportunity to have . . . and all they asked for was the ability 
to have that secret ballot so they could decide amongst themselves, rather 
than being coerced into forming a union.  And the debate about unions, 
we'll certainly get into the major portion of that debate in The Trade 
Union Act. 
 
But I think there was a principle there and I think the minister's comments 
at the end of his recent remarks certainly indicate that there seems to be 
some contradictory response regarding the whole Bill that's before us today 
and the government's actions in certain matters. 
 
I'd jut like to bring to the minister's attention some of the comments, 
some of the quotes he made when he introduced the Bill back in June of '93 
. . . or last May.  Last May, the Justice minister quoted the Supreme 
Court, saying that it was necessary to take the veto power away from 
government in regards to deciding salaries, pensions, allowances, etc., of 
judges. 
 
The Justice minister said the focus of his amendments were to ensure that 
benefits for provincial courts and the method of determining those benefits 
adequately respect the independence of the court and the judges of that 
court.  And that the fact that an independent commission with the ability 
to make binding recommendations will be considering matters of judicial 
compensation, will help to ensure that judicial independence will indeed be 
preserved. 
 
He even quoted the Supreme Court in his second reading speech: 
 

 The essence of such (financial) security is that the right to salary and 
pension should be established by law and not be subject to arbitrary 
interference by the Executive in a manner that could affect judicial 
independence. 

 
And, Mr. Chairman, we agree with this.  We agreed with the minister at the 
time when he introduced the legislation that appointed the commission.  We 
agreed with his comments that there should be judicial independence.  That 
the government of the day, be they Liberal, New Democrat, or Conservative 
or any other party, should not have the ability just to override any wage 
increase that would be coming to the courts or to certain portions of the 
public sector of our province. 



 

 

 
But there are certain areas of our province and of our jurisdiction that 
there should be some independence because the courts basically act 
independently of this House; they administer the laws and the rules of this 
Assembly. 
 
So it would seem to me that the minister has made a number of contradictory 
statements even in this House.  And I'm wondering how the minister can 
justify the actions that he's taken today in view of the comments he made 
back in May of 1993 regarding the whole process that established the 
commission. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the member has me on the hook here and I 
freely admit it.  I made one of the great speeches in the history of this 
Assembly when I introduced that Bill, in my view.  And I did it with pride 
and it was a principled approach.  By that Act we had attempted to assert a 
degree of judicial independence on the question of salaries and benefits 
which was unparalleled in the history of this country. 
 
It was in a real sense a bold and new experiment.  It went far beyond the 
needs to respect the principle of judicial independence.  Mr. Chair, I want 
to emphasize that to the member -- the provisions of the legislation in 
1993 went far beyond the recognized principles surrounding the idea of 
judicial independence. 
 
In other words, the courts recognized that there are some limits to the 
idea of judicial independence when you talk about money for judges.  And 
there is jurisprudence on the point; there is decisions of the Supreme 
Court of Canada on the point. 
 
For example, I have cited the Beauregard case previously in this House, 
which had to do with judges' pensions and an attempt by a government to 
reduce the amount of the pensions that are payable to judges.  And that 
case shows that there are limitations on it.  You can't single out judges 
for special salary treatment. 
 
And I would point out to the member that other provinces have within the 
last year or two either lowered the salaries of judges or are proposing to 
do so.  Alberta, Manitoba, our neighbours on either side, have moved or are 
moving to lower the salaries of their provincial court judges.  And there 
are freezes declared by the government for judges' salaries in Ontario and 
in Nova Scotia and indeed in the federal jurisdiction as well where there 
are many, many judges affected by the freeze. 
 
All of that I cite in support of my proposition that what we did a year ago 
was a bold new experiment and went beyond what the law requires as a matter 
of constitutional imperative when you're talking about the independence of 
the judges. 
 
What we did, Mr. Chair, by the legislation of last year, was put beyond the 
control of the government, the salary of judges.  And I have acknowledged 



 

 

that that was a mistake, and it's a mistake that we're trying by this 
legislation to correct.  What makes it a mistake is that at the end of the 
day in our system of government it is the elected government that must 
account to the taxpayers for the expenditure of taxpayers' dollars. 
 
And we are responsible for it and it is just not appropriate in 
circumstances like this that we are delegating that power to a third party.  
Now you can do it in certain circumstances, I suppose, but in the fiscal 
situation where we are in, where we're asking so many people to make such 
large sacrifices, it is just not appropriate that we delegate that function 
to outside people.  And that was the mistake. 
 
And the proof of the pudding is always in the eating.  This pudding just 
was not consumable, was not digestible.  And so we have to haul it back and 
fix it as we're doing by this legislation. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- In other words, Mr. Minister, that was detestable. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was looking back at a Bill last year and just reflecting 
back on the commission that was 
 Destablished by the former minister of Justice, the Hon. Mr. Lane, and 
certainly the judges have indicated that the guidelines that were 
established in May of 1993 were a lot more impartial than the former 
commission, as it was a political appointment; whereas this one was made up 
of appointments from government and the court and quite independent. 
 
And at that time we're aware of the recommendation made by the Schmeiser 
commission which recommended 104,000 in the first year, 1990, with 
percentage increases in the next two years, which would have brought the 
judges' salary to roughly $112,000 by 1993. 
 
And as we reviewed the recommendations of the new commission, it seems that 
their recommendations weren't that far off -- basically a little higher.  I 
think if you look at the numbers and the fact that the increase wasn't 
granted or accepted or a decision made prior to the last election, if you 
look at those increases, you look at what the Schmeiser commission went . . 
. or the new commission went just a little further. 
 
The salary increases weren't all that significantly large, considering the 
fact that in the offices of government, and certainly in many of the 
departments . . . now maybe the minister's salary hasn't increased per se 
as far as his executive salary over the last couple of years -- I just 
can't remember all the facts -- but we have seen a number of increases that 
have taken place in the public sector that even far exceed what was offered 
here to the judges. 
 
And the minister likes to hang his hat on the fact that . . . and the 
government, that there wasn't a debt in the province of Saskatchewan back 
in 1982, and that they really didn't have an idea of what it was in 1991 
when the Premier even acknowledged in the debate of 1991 that the debt was 
possibly in the overall figure of roughly 14.6. 
 
The minister also brought out the fact that Manitoba and Alberta, the 



 

 

jurisdictions of Manitoba and Alberta, would be rolling back or looking at 
rolling back.  And I think when you look at the scenario they're using 
there, both of those provinces have . . . and are rolling back salaries of 
all public sector employees.  It's not just confined to one group.  It's 
basically saying if we're doing it for one, then we're doing it for all 
public sector employees. 
 
So I can buy the argument that maybe 4 per cent might have been a little 
high -- and the minister would like to use the ballpark figure of 24.  But 
I have difficulty in buying the argument that the government may not or 
couldn't have been aware of what the commission would come up with. 
 
And I think that's what the judges are saying today, is the government was 
aware of what the Schmeiser commission came up with.  They appointed a 
commission which was, as far as the judiciary believed, really as close to 
independent as you could get.  And they came up with the recommendation 
that the government is telling us now that they really couldn't live with.  
And what the judges are saying, the government must have been aware. 
 
Mr. Minister, you must have had a pretty good idea of what may be coming 
down the pipe in light of what the Schmeiser commission had relayed and in 
view of the fact that we were looking at a six-year salary grid, not just a 
one-year grid, and that the new commission would be looking at this 
six-year period going back to 1990 and projecting it into, say, 1995. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think it isn't really fair of you to say that you would 
have no idea.  I'm not exactly sure how you as minister or your Executive 
Council would not have had in the back of your minds some questions as to 
the type of salary increase that would be coming down. 
 
And based on that, it would seem to me that there should have been some -- 
as we indicated earlier -- some limitations in the original piece of 
legislation that would have set out some stricter guidelines so the 
commission would have know exactly what the government was expecting of 
them in view of the arguments the government has been presenting all along 
about the debt and how we control the debt and the fact that we need to 
work within those guidelines.  Wouldn't you agree, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- In our discussions with the judges following the 
swearing in of this government, we had made it perfectly, abundantly clear 
that we couldn't pay the 14 per cent, or let me put it . . . we couldn't 
afford to pay the Schmeiser award.  So the judges knew that and knew why.  
And that was really the starting point of those negotiations, as I have 
described earlier in the House today. 
 
And I want to tell the member frankly that we didn't . . . it never 
occurred to us that we would get the kind of award that we got.  We thought 
we made perfectly plain we can't afford 14 per cent; we certainly can't 
afford 24.  And the whole thrust of our submission to the judges . . . one 
of the main thrusts of the submission was this fact of our fiscal problems 
and our inability to pay and what we were paying everyone else. 
 
We showed in our material, for example, that since 1982 the salaries in the 



 

 

public sector generally had increased by some 34 per cent, and the salary 
for judges over the same period had increased by 52 per cent.  We drew that 
to the attention of the commission and in some detail laid out the zero, 
zero, two and a half per cent policy of the government and why we had 
followed that. 
 
The award of the commission is instructive on this point.  In two places in 
the award, the commission recognizes or pays -- I don't want to be 
offensive at all -- but pays lip-service to the points that we made about 
our fiscal problem.  The commission said at page 10: 
 

 The economic condition of our province and its people must be a factor in 
our recommendations on judicial compensation. 

 
And at the bottom of page 10 and again I quote: 
 

 Local conditions, the ability to attract suitable candidates, and the 
ability of resident taxpayers to pay must all be considered. 

 
But those two statements have to be taken in the context of what the 
commission said on page 9 of the award, which I will quote to the member 
because of its importance: 
 

 The commission agrees with the judges' association assertion that "a 
viable independent court cannot be randomly made to accede to political 
fiscal policy measures on the plea of poverty.  Moreover, the logical 
extension of the ability to pay argument is that the executive does have 
the ability to pay but chooses not to, in order to target its fiscal 
resources to other priorities in accordance with political policy." 

 
Now the commission accepted that submission from the judges.  We had never 
expected that to be the result.  We thought it was perfectly clear and we 
tried to make it so in our submission, and indeed it had been made so in 
countless speeches by the Premier and by the Minister of Finance as to the 
fiscal realities in this province and the need for restraint and the 
general need for restraint and, as I have mentioned so often now, the 
building of a consensus around the need for constraint which the commission 
swept right by. 
 
Now I'm not pouring any kind of scorn on the commission or being critical 
of it.  They did their job and that's fine.  I am not attacking them in any 
way, shape or form, but I am trying to reinforce the point, that the 
government just had no clue at all, no thought, that any award like this 
would be coming down.  We expected one that would pay attention to and 
would respect some of the urgent fiscal problems that we in this province 
are facing.  We expected that the award would perhaps not exactly mirror 
the public sector settlements, but at least would take them into account in 
such a way that it would not violate the conscience as far as their size is 
concerned. 
 
(1515) 
 
So the answer to the member's question is that we didn't have a clue.  We 



 

 

acknowledge and I acknowledge again today that this is an excellent court, 
that it is staffed by judges who are the full measure of any provincial 
court judges in this country.  We also acknowledge that the court is on the 
cutting edge of progress on some very difficult issues that courts of its 
kind face right across the country.  And I cite its relationship to the 
aboriginal community as being one of those. 
 
We also acknowledge that the court is underpaid.  At the time of the 
Blakeney administration the court was among the highest paid of its kind in 
the country.  It is now the lowest paid of its kind in the country.  They 
need a wage increase.  They probably deserve a wage increase more or less 
like this award is, but in this fiscal climate we can't pay it. 
 
To pay it would threaten, would threaten all that we've tried to do over 
our two and a half years.  If we were to pay the judges, we would lose our 
moral authority to reject the claims of literally hundreds of 
organizations, of municipalities, of working people who work for the 
government or one of the Crown corporations, and we would have lost that 
gain.  If we were to do that, that would do incredible harm to the future 
of our province. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I think your last 
couple of sentences in your comments reflect the fact that this basically 
came down to politics at the end of the day versus what was really right 
and wrong and following the actions then that you had laid out in the 
original piece of legislation that would have taken your hands off of . . . 
basically took your hands off of the decision and asked the commission to 
come up with a binding agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, you also alluded to the fact that certainly the Provincial 
Court is one of the lowest paid in Canada. One of the questions that has 
been raised, and as we've found out too, it has been acknowledged that 
there are two levels of courts and judges, judiciary, in this province; one 
is federal and one's provincial.  And the one point that continually is 
brought to our attention is the fact that there is getting to be a larger 
and larger spread between the two courts.  And not that the Provincial 
Court is asking to be brought on par with the federal court, but I think 
they're asking for fairness. 
 
Mr. Minister, you continue to rely on the fact that your government is 
trying to bring about some fiscal responsibility.  Yet while you and your 
colleagues were on this side of the House fiscal responsibility was a 
foreign word, in fact it may have been a swear word at that time.  There 
was no such thing as fiscal responsibility in the demands that were being 
made as opposition members. 
 
Now when I look at the commission that was appointed, and you had the 
ability, the government did appoint one commissioner, and in view of the 
comments that you made about fiscal responsibility and about the problems 
that you're facing with the debt, I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if it 
wouldn't have been appropriate to at least maybe have appointed the deputy 
minister of Finance to this commission rather than as we saw we ended up 
with three legal minds on the commission.  The deputy minister of Finance 



 

 

would have had a pretty good understanding of the economic climate that the 
province was facing and maybe would have brought some of those points a 
little closer to bear at the time. 
 
A couple of questions I do have here, Mr. Minister: when we look at the 
commission, did the commission make its decision unanimously?  Were there 
any dissenting opinions on the commission's decision?  And I wonder when I 
say that, Mr. Minister, did the government representative at least bring to 
the forefront in the deliberations some of the concerns and what the 
government was attempting to do and the whole basis of fiscal and financial 
responsibility in addressing the debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't know the answer to that question because the 
commission worked of course . . . the commission worked in private when it 
was putting together its award. 
 
I recall clearly the member himself making some points about the 
constitution of the commission during the debate of the original 
legislation last year.  And one has to pause and ponder over the suggestion 
that three lawyers were not an appropriate composition for this board.  I 
have no response to that.  I don't know how I can respond to it. 
 
I can say that we were very careful about the question of selection, and it 
was not a decision that was casually arrived at.  The government's nominee 
is well known to me as a long-time law partner, something like eight years 
or so.  And I know her to be tough and resolute -- and I use that term in 
its best sense -- stubborn as anyone can be.  And those are qualities that 
are desirable in a board member in this kind of a situation. 
 
And Marty Irwin, the chair in Saskatoon, has an excellent reputation and is 
a . . . If I were repeating history, I'd probably agree to his appointment 
again.  I'm not criticizing them personally; I just can't live with the 
award that they produced. 
 
Now if I were naming them all over again with the benefit of hindsight, I 
think that we would take other factors into account and perhaps look for a 
sort of broad occupational mix on the board and bring the different 
perspectives to light. 
 
But that is not to criticize the members of this commission.  I am not 
criticizing them.  They are honest, honourable people and they acted 
according to their best lights.  We just can't accept the result. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, we certainly 
could belabour and extend the debate on this question but it's not my 
intention to do so. 
 
However, I might like to add . . . And certainly I want to thank the 
officials for the help they have been, even in the past as we've been 
discussing some of the questions and certain questions with regards to 
justice. 
 
But I'd like to add, Mr. Minister, that the one thing, and maybe the one 



 

 

major mistake with that last piece of legislation, was the fact that you 
made that piece of legislation binding.  I think if we would have 
established the commission and left it wide open, it would have given you 
and your colleagues the opportunity then to review the recommendations of 
the commission.  We wouldn't be sitting here today and retroactively 
changing legislation, changing the law because it fits the government's 
agenda to change the law on this particular matter but on other matters 
where we need to change the law, where other people are affected, the 
government hasn't moved. 
 
And not that I'm trying to get you off the hook, Mr. Minister.  I think at 
the same time the argument that was brought up time and time again, and I 
continue to reiterate, is the fact that as the senior law official in this 
province, and as I raised earlier on in the day regarding the whole process 
of justice and the parole system, there are a number of questions out 
there.  It's very imperative that as lawgivers and law people and 
personnel, that we establish some principles and guidelines and that we 
live by those guidelines if we intend and if we expect the average public 
or the general public to adhere to the laws of the land. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, my final comments regarding this would be that as I 
indicated earlier, probably the biggest mistake that was made was that this 
original piece of legislation was made binding.  And I would just ask you, 
as you were reviewing the recommendations made by the commission and 
realizing that you had established the commission with a binding . . . 
making it a binding process, the commission must have given some 
consideration . . . 
 
I guess what I would ask, did the commission give you any avenue to work 
with rather than just saying, we recommend a strict, straight 24 per cent 
over the period of time?  Did they give you some variations or variables 
that you could have worked with that would have fit within the guidelines 
of the legislation that you could have made a decision on and would not 
have put us in the position we're facing today?  Was that made available to 
you, Mr. Minister?  And thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Okay, I just want to say to the member that he's 
right, you know, he's perfectly right on the point that we ought not to 
have made it binding.  That's right.  That's why we're here -- to correct 
that mistake. 
 
I also want to say to the member that he's perfectly right on the question 
of the principle of the importance of the government following the law.  
And this kind of retroactive legislation is as odious to us as it is to 
you, as it should be to anyone.  It's just that in some circumstances you 
have to do that in order to do what you have to do. 
 
In this case, as I've said so often to the member and to the press, your 
decision is whether you're going to pay the increase or not.  If you decide 
not to pay it, then you have to do what we're doing here.  You don't like 
it but you're just left with no choice.  But I accept the member's points 
and his criticism without qualification. 
 



 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I've only got one point I wish to 
discuss with the minister and then we can dispense with this -- the issue 
that I raised earlier today, Mr. Chairman, in question period, I want the 
minister to put on the record for me, as a Minister of Justice and a former 
deputy minister of Labour and someone who understands these issues I think 
fairly clearly. 
 
Afterwards, Mr. Chairman, I met with my school group and they asked me a 
number of questions, as did members of the media.  And all of them asked 
the same question of me, and I would address this to the minister. 
 
On one hand we have a commission struck with quasi-judicial powers to look 
at the issue of judges' salary under a binding agreement, appointed by 
order in council.  On the other hand, we have a Labour Relations Board 
dealing with employees in a Woolco store in Moose Jaw -- once again a board 
with quasi-judicial power, appointed by order in council -- with the 
ability to administer or deal with the issue of whether people have the 
right to a secret ballot vote on decertification or certification. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, today my students, all of whom are high school, could 
not understand what the difference was, other than the fact that in the 
case of judges they are fairly highly paid as compared to the rest of the 
population, they are appointed by political parties while in power to the 
position of judge, and in fact many of them have political pasts. 
 
And I have the same interpretation here, Mr. Chairman, and I say this to 
the minister.  Those small group of individuals in our society, because of 
their economic status, their reputational status, and in some cases their 
political status, I believe are far easier to pick on than are, for 
instance, the people involved in the Labour Relations Board who are 
appointed by government.  And in fact the whole issue of the Woolco 
employees . . . most of whom are part time and fairly low on the economic 
wage scale compared, for instance, maybe to the rest of the province, but 
whose union leadership are fairly highly paid and have considerable 
influence. 
 
And it is much easier for the minister and his party to pick on 40-some 
individuals, do away with the binding part, do away with legally struck 
laws of the Legislative Assembly.  And yet his leader and his Premier says 
to me in response in question period: I could no more interfere with the 
powers of the Labour Relations Board . . . in fact he accused myself and my 
political party of somehow trying to undermine the very fabric of our 
society by even suggesting that. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, it wasn't lost on the school children here today in the 
gallery and it wasn't lost on the media, and I would like the minister's 
response of how he squares those two things.  How he can square them as a 
professional in the legal society, in the legal world; as a former deputy 
minister in the public service; and today as the highest law officer in the 
province of Saskatchewan, how you can square those two things when I see 
them as being very, very similar, Mr. Chairman, in the way that they deal 
with the lives of individuals in our society. 
 



 

 

And I say that the minister, if his will was there, and his government, 
could do exactly the same thing on behalf of people in the Woolco store in 
Moose Jaw as they have alleged to have done on behalf of citizens in our 
society by saying there is law and then there is justice.  And, Mr. 
Minister, I would like that explanation. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The first labour relations law creating of an 
independent board to determine questions that arose under the Act was 
established by Mackenzie King during the Second World War by order in 
council, as the government has a fair amount of power under the War 
Measures Act and that's one of the things that his government did. 
 
It was patterned on legislation passed by President Roosevelt in the United 
States around about 1936 and it was called the Wagner Act, put forward by 
the senator from New York I believe. And that has been the way of 
administering that statute in the United States ever since.  And that has 
been the pattern for administration right across Canada and it remains so 
to this day. 
 
Those boards are I think without exception appointed by order in council. 
And so we know from our experience that the make-up of that board varies 
over time, and I suppose that's natural considering the way in which 
governments operate. 
 
Some things just haven't changed from the beginning, and that is one of the 
things that haven't changed, is the basis upon which these boards certify 
trade unions as the bargaining agent for employees and how they rescind 
those orders which we call decertification.  They've established a whole 
body of jurisprudence over years and years as to in what circumstances they 
will or will not make those orders. 
 
I made the point earlier during the work of this committee and I'll make it 
again, that the application in the Woolco situation in Moose Jaw where the 
board refused to order a vote, as the member said, refused to decertify, 
was a result that probably would have been reached anywhere in the 
jurisdictions that I mention. 
 
If the case had come up in Alberta, it probably would have had the same 
result because they're applying the same law.  It is a question of looking 
at the circumstances and determining whether there has been any 
interference, and looking at the measure of employee support, and listening 
to whatever evidence has been tendered.  And the result would likely have 
been the same in New Brunswick as in Newfoundland as in British Columbia as 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it seems to me that what we ought to be looking at in this situation is 
the purchaser of the Woolco chain and ask ourselves the question, why is it 
that any company operating in Canada, in North America in the 1990s, would 
decide as a matter of policy that we we're not buying any union stores 
because we don't 
 Ddeal with unions. 



 

 

 
And to that employer I say, take a look at this country, take a look at the 
history of this country, take a look at the constitution of this country.  
The constitution of this country guarantees to all of us freedom of 
association.  It means that we are entitled to join trade unions.  It means 
that we are entitled to exercise that freedom through the representation in 
collective bargaining by a trade union of our own choosing.  And it is 
embedded right in our constitution. 
 
We in Saskatchewan, as is the case everywhere across this country, give 
expression to that freedom through something like The Trade Union Act or 
The Labour Relations Act.  It's part of our system.  And we could ask 
ourselves why it is that a company would come in here and deliberately as a 
matter of policy say, I'm not buying that store because there is a union 
certification covering its employees. 
 
As I've pointed out to the committee, Mr. Chair, there isn't even a 
collective agreement there.  There isn't even a collective agreement laying 
down the terms and conditions of employment, which gives this employer a 
great deal of latitude as to the personnel policies that it will establish 
when it starts business. 
 
But I haven't heard a word from the opposition mentioning that fact.  I 
haven't heard a word.  Instead I hear criticisms of the Minister of Labour 
who's got no control at all over the decisions of the Labour Relations 
Board -- the member knows that because he himself was a member of Executive 
Council and he knows how improper it would be for the minister to interfere 
in any way, shape, or form with the decision making of that board.  And yet 
the minister has been freely criticized. 
 
The law is criticized, and I point out to the member that it is the same 
law in substance as exists right across this country and right across this 
continent.  And so the situation that we have in the Woolco store in Moose 
Jaw is the way the system works.  It's the way the system works. 
 
Now that is to be contrasted to what we experimented with with the judges' 
salaries.  I characterized it as a new and bold experiment, and I 
introduced it in this House myself with pride, pursuant to an agreement 
which I had signed with the judges.  And I was proud of it.  It went far 
beyond what had existed anywhere in this country at any time. 
 
And now I come before the House and say it didn't work.  It seemed like a 
good idea at the time but it didn't work.  It was a bold new experiment 
that just simply didn't work.  It produced a result with which this 
government can't live.  And so we have to take the kind of action that 
we're taking now. 
 
Now that's a far cry, that's a far cry from the proposition that we should 
amend the labour relations legislation in this province in a way that 
doesn't exist anywhere else across this nation or across the United States 
in order to retroactively achieve a result in the Woolco store in Moose 
Jaw.  That was a result, I repeat, which stemmed . . . which flowed 
directly from the decision of the purchaser of the Woolco stores across 



 

 

Canada to not purchase any plants that were subject to a union 
certification or a collective agreement.  That decision is the one we 
should be examining, and not the decision in the ordinary course of 
business from a Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, you just don't get it.  And I'm 
afraid, Mr. Minister, it's because you are so hidebound, so hidebound, that 
you can't see some days, in all due respect, beyond the end of your nose, 
sir. 
 
I suspect when the Wagner Act came in the United States, it was new and 
innovative, too.  And you know what?  Mr. Sam Wal-Mart there went out and 
started a little store and built the largest retail chain in the United 
States and in North America, along with the Wagner Act, Mr. Minister.  And 
you know what?  He doesn't have a unionized employee in the whole darn 
shebang and he's got the Wagner Act, bless its little soul, right there, 
side by side all through his life.  That's what Sam Walton did, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So don't tell me about the Wagner Act as some justification for the way you 
people operate.  It was new and innovative back then.  What you tried with 
the justification, sir, of Supreme Court of Canada and constitutional 
arguments galore one year ago as to why you had to give the judiciary in 
this province the independence to operate beyond the politicians.  You, 
yes, you did set a precedent, but you were most eloquent, Mr. Minister, in 
defending the constitution of this country and this judiciary to no end. 
 
And you know what?  I think you were right.  I think most legal minds in 
this country, Mr. Minister, across this country agree with you.  I suggest 
you probably set a precedent that will be followed in province after 
province as time goes on, because the weight of decision after decision 
will come down on your side.  Maybe they'll call it the Mitchell Act, and 
it'll be like the Wagner Act and we'll have it right up here. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the simple fact is though that you appointed by OC 
(order in council) those three individuals, even though you were told at 
the time that it probably would cause you grief, if you chose three 
lawyers, as you picked the individuals that sit on the Labour Relations 
Board, sir.  And I would suggest to you that as I view these decisions 
across Canada, province by province, it does have some bearing on who the 
government is and who appointed the commission as to the type of decision. 
 
In general, they follow certain principles.  But there have been decisions 
across this country, Mr. Minister, that are different in this province as 
they are in others.  And I mean one of the greatest criticisms I heard 
during the 1980s, as I sat in this House when you people were over here, 
was the fact that there were some terrible decisions being made by the 
Labour Relations Board because of the type of people we put on it. 
 
Well you now have your people on there.  And I suspect your people have 
about the same bias that you have exhibited in this House today.  And 
that's why I can't . . . I say to you in all honesty, Mr. Minister, I don't 
think you can see beyond here some days.  Because if a bunch of school 



 

 

children coming into this House can pick out the similarities and wonder 
why the contradiction, then I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, a lot of 
people across the province are figuring that the same contradiction exists. 
 
Now I for one don't want to see you interfere in that board.  I believe 
that as it happens in United States of America, where the people that are 
in those positions go before confirmation hearings of the U.S. (United 
States) Senate, that the people that sit on the Labour Relations Board 
should sit in confirmation hearings of this House.  That would be my 
preference, Mr. Minister -- that a committee of this House would ask people 
to come before it and explain to us and the public their preferences in how 
labour legislation would be administered.  I think then you would know 
ahead of time what you're getting.  And when a person stakes their 
reputation on those hearings of confirmation, they then would probably also 
continue through their life on that board. 
 
I think that would be the preferable position for all of us as legislators 
to take, and then we would never have this "you did when you were in" and 
"I did when I was in" sort of thing that we go through every time you OC 
someone onto those boards. 
 
But the simple fact is, Mr. Minister, I don't believe that the principle of 
50 per cent plus 1, of democratic rights and free votes and secret ballots 
in the situation that I refer to have been exercised.  And I would say to 
you, sir, that there is similarities in the situation and you've set a 
precedent last year in this House that will be followed across Canada. 
 
Why don't you start right now and set some precedents on the other side 
that would give people in this province some comfort that you simply can't 
pick on a particular group because they are small in number, because of the 
type of position they hold, or because of the salary they make.  But in 
fact they do have certain basic rights as human beings guaranteed by law in 
the constitution and you seem to take that away and not do it in other 
cases.  And I think that is an inconsistency, Mr. Minister, that is going 
to dog you for the rest of your days.  I really do. 
 
And you can answer or you not can answer, Mr. Minister, but I see an 
inconsistency and so do a lot of other people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I don't agree with the member obviously, and I 
see no purpose in repeating my previous arguments. 
 
I do want to say though that I reject the idea that we are picking on the 
small group of judges.  I mean it happens to be judges, but it could be 
another group . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Farmers or civil servants. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's what worries people -- it could be anybody. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- But the principle is, though, the principle is the 
threat to the consensus, the threat to the restraint program and the 
impossible situation we're in -- if we were to pay the award and then be 



 

 

faced with an avalanche of perfectly legitimate demands from the rest of 
the community. 
 
And every one of them think their case is as good as the judges.  In fact I 
think probably everyone of them think their case is better than the judges.  
And it's just simply not a question of political heat as the member 
suggested.  It is a question of having the moral authority to be able to 
say no.  The moral authority to be able to manage the program so that we 
can get the fiscal situation of this province back on its feet.  That's the 
point. 
 
I want also to say this, that I haven't checked the composition of the 
board lately, but I think that most of the board is the same board as was 
in place when this government assumed office.  I believe that almost all of 
the employer representatives are the same ones that were there, and a good 
number of the trade union representatives are the same.  Now I'm subject to 
correction on that because it's been some time since I checked into it. 
 
Now the Chair is new, but the Chair is a person of exceptional ability and 
I think all members of the House know that.  Beth Bilson is a law professor 
from Saskatoon and her knowledge of the field is huge.  She's an author of 
note; she's published text books; she is a person of exceptional quality 
and exceptional intellect. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I have not heard any credible criticism of Ms. Bilson in the 
performance of her duties on the board, with one exception.  There is a 
major trade union in this province -- and I won't name who it is; I 
shouldn't -- who is extremely critical of the decisions that she makes.  
But I have not heard similar criticisms coming from any other group, either 
the trade unions or the employer organizations. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There is a House amendment to section 5 in the 
definition of agreement, clause (a).  Do you wish me to read it, Mr. Chair?  
Yes? 
 
I move that the committee: 
 

 Amend section 5 of the printed Bill by striking out clause (a) and 
substituting the following: 

 
 "(a) 'agreement' means any agreement, contract or understanding, including 

any amendment to any agreement, contract or understanding, entered into, 
arrived at or concluded before the date this Act is assented to between: 

 
  (i) the Government of Saskatchewan, any present or former member of 



 

 

the Executive Council or any present or former officer or employee of 
the Government of Saskatchewan; and 

 
  (ii) the judges of the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan, whether 

represented by the Saskatchewan Provincial Court Judges' Association 
or in any other manner; 

 
 and includes any enticement, inducement, offer, promise or representation 

made by the Government of Saskatchewan, any present or former member of 
the Executive Council or any present or former officer or employee of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to the judges of the Provincial Court of 
Saskatchewan, whether represented by the Saskatchewan Provincial Court 
Judges' Association or in any other manner". 

 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just . . . obviously the 
minister is strengthening the particular clause in question.  I wonder if 
he would explain to us why he felt he needed to add on these extras to 
something that already was very onerous. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the amendments are 
technical and driven by the draftspersons in the Department of Justice.  If 
the member looks at the Bill that was before the House, the original 
wording, Bill 46, section 5(a), we have added the terms, the words 
"contract or understanding" after the word "agreement". 
 
So it broadens the sense from an agreement, which is capable of being 
defined narrowly, to include contracts or understandings that may not be 
formal agreements.  And this is done out of an abundance of caution and 
recommended by the draftspersons so that there is no possibility of any 
agreement slipping through the Act, slipping through the slats, as it were, 
and having legal effect because it is not an agreement but is a contract or 
understanding. 
 
Secondly, the previous wording talked about an agreement entered into, and 
we add the words "arrived at or concluded", which are very similar words.  
But again it is out of an abundance of caution so that someone else in 
interpreting the Act will give it a broad meaning. 
 
Thirdly, we have removed the date, October 31, 1991, and simply say that 
this applies to any agreement entered into before the date this Act is 
assented to.  That again is a matter of caution and is recommended by the 
draftspersons in the Department of Justice. 
 
The final change is . . . there's a structural change there with the 
introduction of clauses 1 and 2, but after the words "Saskatchewan 
Provincial Court Judges' Association" the words "or in any other manner" is 
added.  So that is whether the judges were represented by the association 
or were represented in some other manner, perhaps by counsel or agent.  And 
the words "or in any other manner" is intended to cover those situations as 
well as the agreements entered into with the judges. 
 
So it's all sort of . . . it's technical and again it's driven by the 
draftspersons in Justice, similar to Wal-Mart. 



 

 

 
Mr. Swenson: -- They're curious words, Mr. Minister, here -- enticement, 
inducement, offer, promise.  I mean the way I read this, and I don't have 
the benefit of your education, Mr. Minister, but it would seem to me what 
we're dealing with here are maybe some verbal commitments that were made by 
members of Executive Council to certain individuals that were trying to 
make sure we keep out of the glue.  Because those types of words only 
indicate to me that there was a lot of bargaining going on on the side here 
beyond what the commission recommended.  And that's why you have to get so 
broad here; is that obviously there were conversations involving members of 
Executive Council that need to be covered off beyond any ability of legal 
recourse. 
 
Otherwise, you tell me why you would use words like that.  Was somebody 
trying to entice the judges into something?  Were there offers made, were 
there promises made that people couldn't live up to and now they have to be 
rectified by legislation?  Just being a lay person, Mr. Minister, that's 
the way I would have to read that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well there certainly was no parallel process going on 
while the commission was working, but there was a good deal of negotiation 
leading up to the agreement of February '93.  And it is in that context 
that we introduced these words. 
 
We don't know of any, but a lot of things are said, and Mr. Cotter was 
representing us at that time.  It may be that he said something that was 
interpreted as a promise or an inducement -- enticement is included because 
that's a heading of possible liability -- and that sort of thing. 
 
So we're just taking that whole event, that whole series of events, the 
negotiations that led to the agreement and eventually led to the 
legislation, we're grabbing a hold of all of that and saying no, that's not 
. . . we're not bound by that. 
 
I agree it's wide-sweeping, but we want it to be so because we don't want 
to create a situation where someone may try to characterize these . . . 
what passed as being representations or promises or inducements or 
enticements or anything like that. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 DClause 5 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that the committee: 
 

 Amend subsection 8(3) of the printed Bill by striking out "None" and 
substituting "Without limiting the generality of subsections 8(1) and (2), 
none". 

 
I so move. 



 

 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that the committee: 
 

 Strike out subsection 9(2) of the printed Bill and substitute the 
following: 

 
 "(2) Section 7 of this Act comes into force on assent". 
 

I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I had tabled an amendment to the preamble to correct 
a typographical error and I just didn't want us to be passing over that.  
You've got that? 
 
The Chair: -- Yes.  Thank you to the minister.  The next item then is the 
preamble of the printed Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I ought to have known you had it under control, Mr. 
Chair.  I move that the committee: 
 

 Amend the preamble of the printed Bill by striking out "respecting to" in 
the third paragraph and substituting "respecting". 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Preamble as amended agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 4 p.m. until 4:10 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 Van Mulligen Murray t 
 Wiens Draper t 
 Tchorzewski Whitmore t 
 Lingenfelter Sonntag t 
 Shillington Flavel t 
 Anguish Roy t 
 Teichrob Cline t 
 Johnson Scott t 
 Kowalsky Crofford t 



 

 

 Carson Wormsbecker t 
 Mitchell Stanger t 
 Penner Knezacek t 
 Bradley Harper t 
 Lyons Keeping t 
 Lautermilch Jess t 
 Calvert Langford t 
 Renaud t 
-- 33 R 

Nays 
 Swenson Boyd t 
 Muirhead Toth t 
 Devine Britton t 
 Neudorf D'Autremont t 
 Martens Bergman t 
-- 10 R 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended on division. 
 
(1615) 
 
Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 

1993 
 
The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the minister to introduce the 
officials who have joined us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it is my pleasure to introduce to 
you, on my right, the acting deputy minister of Economic Development, Leona 
Gorr, and on my left, the director of trade development, Gerry Adamson. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, as I understand the 
Bill, it grants powers to the minister for him to establish a Trade 
Development Corporation.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, given the fact 
that this province has to trade very extensively in order to survive, a 
couple of questions. 
 
Number one, what type of entities does he envision with the development of 
this particular new entity; what type of businesses or areas does the 
minister see being enhanced by having a separate Trade Development 
Corporation?  We'll let him respond and then I'll ask him how that squares 
with some other things that his government is doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, the member I think asks an 
important question in the fact of what are the areas of growth for export 
that will be affected by the development of a trade corporation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me go back a couple of steps, Mr. Chairman, to say that the development 
of a trade corporation started out as a result of our discussions we had 
with business during the development of the Partnership for Renewal 
program, which has been in effect in the province for about 18 months. 



 

 

 
There were a number of small- and medium-sized companies that made it very 
clear that they had difficulty moving their product into the world market 
simply because of the very large cost of doing their own trade development.  
You can well imagine a small company with sales of a couple of hundred 
thousand dollars or even a couple of million dollars, the amount of money 
that is needed to make those trips into various parts of the world to find 
out whether or not first of all there is need for their product, and then 
the extra trips to go and actually sign deals.  It's a very, very expensive 
project and program for small- and medium-sized companies. 
 
The concept of a Trade Development Corporation actually came from the 
business community who said look, there is need in this province for an 
agency that would be run and managed by the private and public sector, that 
is a partnership between government and the private sector, funded by the 
private and public sector, that would assist us in moving our product into 
the world market. 
 
I think very readily the areas that seem to appear to make a lot of sense 
are in the areas of agriculture, some of the export of our cattle and live 
hog animals, as well as value added agricultural products.  If you look in 
some of the other biotechnology areas, you'll find that we have great 
ability to export some of that technology.  In the area of 
telecommunications and information technology, I think that's another area 
that we expect to be able to work.  But it's not limited to those areas, 
but what it will be is a corporation that will deal in essence with small- 
and medium-sized companies that see a need to move their product, or an 
advantage of moving their product into the world market. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That certainly is something that 
I think everyone in the province would agree with.  Those are areas that 
have long been identified and targeted as areas that both need help, and in 
some instances in the past have received a certain degree of government 
assistance in order to carry out their mandates. 
 
One of the reasons that governments across Canada recognized the free trade 
agreement as being positive was because it took away the inability of 
others in other jurisdictions to interfere with the free flow of goods. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, your government and the members of your political party 
in the past have often been against this freer flow of goods and services 
both within North America and around the world.  In fact for a long time 
you felt that protectionism was a better way to go than freer trade. 
 
And I'm wondering how your recent pronouncements regarding for instance 
interprovincial trade or the NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) 
square with what these companies are telling you, that they want to work 
with government to enhance their ability to trade more freely around the 
world.  I'm wondering how you square those issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to make it very clear that 
our government is very, very intent on increasing trade with other parts of 
the world.  As the member will know, Saskatchewan as a percentage of their 



 

 

GDP (gross domestic product) does more trading and is involved more in 
trade than even the large trading companies of the world, whether it's 
Japan or Germany.  As a percentage of our GDP, Saskatchewan depends more on 
trade than any other jurisdiction that I know of in the world. 
 
So the thought of backing away from trade arrangements and trade deals is 
something that no Government of Saskatchewan could possibly be in favour 
of, and certainly not this government. 
 
We stand adamantly that we are working for more trade arrangements.  We 
have worked on trade arrangements where we are now exporting a large 
percentage of the pork going into the tourism market in Cuba.  This is a 
brand-new market in Saskatchewan.  Hog producers have virtually captured 
that. 
 
I say that we have played a small part through our department in working 
with Sask Pork International.  Jim Morris attended on a tour and trip that 
we took to Havana not long ago.  And I think if you were to talk to Mr. 
Morris and SPI (Saskatchewan Pork International) they would very clearly 
indicate that the department officials have been very instrumental in 
helping them enter into that market. 
 
Mexico, we're moving quickly to expand our market of pork.  And right as we 
speak, there would be shipments of pork moving out of Saskatchewan into the 
Mexican market.  And we're very excited about trade opportunities that 
exist right around the world for Saskatchewan products. 
 
There's, I think, a misunderstanding that the member has that he would say 
that every trade deal is a good trade deal.  I think this is where his 
argument breaks down.  To say that people should work towards good trade 
deals is something we all agree with.  We had trouble obviously on the 
negotiation tactics of the federal government when it came to the 
Canada-U.S. free trade deal. 
 
We said that because of the powers of the President of the United States 
under section 22 of the Agriculture Act in the United States, that all the 
barriers being removed in Canada, there still was the fundamental principle 
that the President of the United States could step in at any moment and put 
up barriers to durum wheat moving into the United States.  We said that 
clearly to your federal government, the government of Brian Mulroney.  You 
absolutely ignored that and wouldn't admit that the President of the United 
States has these unusual powers that the Prime Minister of Canada has none 
of. 
 
And lo and behold, today we see the attempt by the Americans, even under a 
free trade arrangement, putting up barriers that they could do with the 
snap of the finger by the President of the United States, because the 
federal government did nothing to protect the Saskatchewan farmers against 
that kind of power by the President of the United States. 
 
What it is is nai pïve bargainers on the part of Canadians and Saskatchewan 
farmers which you, sir, were when you were a member of the Conservative 
government in Saskatchewan, because you didn't lay out that problem for the 



 

 

federal counterparts.  Just having trade deals doesn't necessarily mean 
they're in the best interest of Saskatchewan producers, and all business 
people know that.  They're only good for Saskatchewan producers if they're 
in their best interest. 
 
And I guess what bothers a lot of people in Saskatchewan, the reason you're 
not in government is because of your nai pïve support for the U.S.-Canada 
free trade deal -- nai pïve, blind support with no criticism, no analysis; 
just saying yes, it's a trade deal; let's go for it.  That's the reason 
that you now sit in opposition. 
 
I think when you're working on trade arrangements you have to have 
sophisticated people.  You need legal advice.  You have to know the nuances 
of what the trade arrangements will be.  And that's why it's important even 
now when we talk about trade barriers between provinces, you're not simply 
go out and say, we're going to remove all the barriers without knowing what 
you're talking about.  You have to know how that would affect the northern 
miner who got their job because of affirmative action by the government in 
signing surface leases with the uranium companies. 
 
For you to stand up in the House and say we should get rid of all barriers 
and not hire Northerners, tells you that you are again being nai pïve about 
trade deals and trade arrangements.  They're very complicated, they're 
never ending, and if we came back to this House 50 years from now I would 
bet my bottom dollar that what they'll be talking about is new and better 
trade arrangements. 
 
For you to believe that suddenly there's a panacea where you could sign a 
trade deal and that's the end of it and we never have to look at it again, 
it's never going to be that way.  That, sir, is nai pïve and irresponsible 
to believe that that's how trade arrangements are made. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. Minister, I would say 
to you that your behaviour while in opposition particularly, and even since 
becoming a minister is irresponsible, because quite frankly it misleads the 
public.  The President of the United States has had these powers under 
their constitution for eons.  The simple fact is, Mr. Minister, that every 
time Canada has gone to the bi-national dispute mechanism we've won -- 
whether it be on grain or on pork, on lumber, we've won. 
 
And the simple fact, Mr. Minister, was before that agreement was in place, 
we didn't win any of them because the President of the United States had 
that power, the Congress had power, governors had power.  Every time some 
guy wanted to run for the Senate, we had the border shut down. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, let's be realistic.  Anything was better than what was 
before.  And you're right, trade has to progress along.  And that's why 
we've seen the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) round 
concluded.  That is why, once that is concluded, that the powers of the 
President of the United States will be curbed in certain areas.  You and I 
both know that. 
 
The simple fact is, Mr. Minister, we have won and won and won because of 



 

 

that agreement.  And that's why our producers today have the confidence 
that they do to do all the things you're talking about.  That's why SPI was 
formed, for goodness' sakes, Mr. Minister, and why they've been able to 
spread Saskatchewan pork all over the northern hemisphere and indeed are 
beyond that now. 
 
They didn't do it listening to the rhetoric of you and your party in 
opposition, that's for sure.  They said no, we're not going to listen to 
that nonsense; let's get on with trading, let's get on with expanding 
Saskatchewan's horizons. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, there's another point that you raised in your opening 
remarks that I would like you to respond to.  You very clearly said that 
Saskatchewan business, and particularly small- and medium-sized business, 
need the ability to develop new markets.  And that's because they often 
don't have the wherewithal. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, your government has embarked on a whole host of actions 
which impede that company's ability to generate capital.  And I refer you, 
Mr. Minister, to the Crown corporations and the way that you have raised 
utility rates over and over and over again.  I refer you, Mr. Minister, to 
the level of taxation in this province, which you promised in opposition 
that you wouldn't raise but in fact in government have raised. 
 
And now, Mr. Minister, we have the situation where your seat mate, the 
Minister of Labour, is talking about changing Labour Standards and The 
Trade Union Act.  And most of the people, Mr. Minister, that you probably 
were dealing with in developing your new trade concepts are the very people 
today who meet in Davidson on Monday and condemn your government roundly, 
condemn your government roundly for the moves you're making because you're 
going to increase the cost of doing business significantly in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  And they're saying we may have to move out to other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it's one thing to say, I'm going to develop in concert 
with the private sector a new trade corporation for the province of 
Saskatchewan to go out and sell our products worldwide, and at the same 
time other agencies of your government are busy upping the costs of doing 
business significantly, to the point where people are telling us, and I 
know they're telling you, that it is impossible for Saskatchewan business 
to be competitive because the cost of business has got so high here.  You 
can develop all of the trade corporations you want but if your bottom line 
is such that you don't have any money left, you're not going to export 
anything. 
 
And that's why I asked you, Mr. Minister, to show me some areas where you 
think there's possibilities to enhance trade.  Those same areas, as I 
understand what your seat mate is proposing under his legislation, would 
raise the cost of doing business, Mr. Minister -- raise the cost of doing 
business significantly for these people. 
 
(1630) 
 



 

 

Now I'm wondering how you can square, on one hand, raising utility rates 
across the board, raising taxes across the board, changing the rules of the 
workplace across the board to cost more money for every employer in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and how that is going to help them enhance their 
trade opportunities.  It just doesn't square, Mr. Minister. 
 
So could you . . . If you want to go sector by sector and show me where 
there is one new job, one new job, or one new opportunity for these people, 
I'd be pleased to hear it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to mention to the member 
opposite, who just has a heck of a time keeping up with what we're doing in 
this government even though I keep reminding him, in the document 
Partnership for Renewal we made it very clear that we were doing about 31 
initiatives that were called in order to create a positive environment for 
economic development. 
 
And if you had that document with you, you would find that on page 16 we 
say -- and business agreed with us -- that we were going to rejuvenate the 
labour market policy.  It's right there, written into the economic 
development strategy, signed off by business.  Mel Watson, the president of 
the chamber of commerce, has said this document is the Bible for economic 
development. 
 
In page 16 it says: 
 
 Review and update labour legislation and regulations including the 

Occupational Health and Safety, Pension Benefits, Trade Union, Workers' 
Compensation and Labour Standards . . . 

 
This comes as no surprise to the chamber of commerce that we would be 
making changes to occupational health, to labour standards, to The Trade 
Union Act.  They knew we were going to do it because it's part of the 
document. 
 
Included in that document as well is a plan, and I quote to you, to 
"Develop a . . . Saskatchewan trade marketing development organization."  
That's what we're doing here today. 
 
So on one hand the Minister of Labour is doing what we promised the people 
in the election and in our Partnership for Renewal document, that is, 
improve the labour legislation of the province which was severely damaged 
by Bill 104 under your administration to a standard that will be more 
equivalent with the rest of Canada. 
 
Now that will surprise no one.  There will be a debate obviously between 
labour and business while they nudge and urge the government to move one 
way or the other -- and that's totally expected.  And in meeting with 
business people over and over, which I have done many times in the last few 
weeks, and I'm sure the Minister of Labour is meeting with people from the 
labour movement, we will work out labour legislations, as we did with 
occupational health, that will lead to strong exports from Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

And just so you know how we're making out so far: in 1991 we exported from 
this province $5.2 billion worth of goods -- $5.2 billion.  During that 
period from 1991-93 we updated the occupational health and safety.  We 
redid some of the pension legislation.  All of which you fought.  Workers' 
Compensation, you fought.  Did that stop exports?  No, they went from 5.2 
billion to 6.2 billion in 1993 -- up by 20 per cent during that period; 
during the gloom-and-doom scenario that you painted how this was going to 
affect trade. 
 
What do we expect will result from the amendments to The Labour Standards 
and Trade Union Act?  I would expect that our trade will be up very 
handsomely when you come back and ask the question next year.  Do I think 
it's going to hurt exports?  Absolutely not. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, to honestly believe what you just said is 
ludicrous.  You full well know that the trading numbers that you quote are 
a direct result of trade agreements signed by a federal Conservative 
government with the backing of most jurisdictions in Canada at that time -- 
1991, 1992, 1993 -- interest rates going down, inflation down, and more 
trading opportunities.  Those were the reality, Mr. Minister.  That's why 
Canadians were exporting bigger numbers.  It had nothing to do with you 
people -- absolutely nothing. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, when you were developing the document and . . 
. I'm glad you quoted Mr. Watson, the former president of the chamber of 
commerce.  I'm wondering at the time you were developing that nice little 
scenario if the views of your Minister of Labour, which were quoted today 
from The Financial Post, were brought up at that time, where the minister 
in introducing ground-breaking labour laws and says these are needed to rid 
the workplace of conflicts created mainly by the greedy ruthlessness of 
Saskatchewan business. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if the folks that believed in you 18 months 
ago when you put that document together, still believe in you today after 
your Minister of Labour, your seat mate, accuses them of being ruthless and 
greedy and that they glorify greed and they, quite frankly, are very, very 
bad people because of the way that they've treated Saskatchewan workers; I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, how you square the comments of the Minister of Labour 
with your document there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member will want to talk 
about the advantages that business has here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, obviously he'll want to refer to some of the tax changes that 
we have made that affect business and have helped with their stability in 
this province, and is the reason why people like Sears Canada have created 
5, 6, 700 jobs here in the city of Regina because it is a good place to 
work and to do business. 
 
We have obviously removed the E&H (education and health) tax off 1-800 
numbers. This is far from being a tax increase, but a major tax reduction 
for many businesses.  The small-business corporate tax has been reduced by 
20 per cent; from 10 per cent to 8 per cent.  We have established now the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation which we're about to pass here in 



 

 

the Assembly.  We are establishing regional economic development 
authorities.  We've established the Provincial Action Committee on the 
Economy which does a lot of work, and business people who are represented 
on that organization advise the government on a regular basis.  And we've 
also established the Regulatory Code of Conduct by which government have to 
go through a serious and rigorous process in order to make regulatory 
change or to make legislative change for that matter. 
 
And so I think business is relatively comfortable in Saskatchewan.  
Obviously we have a job to do in creating an atmosphere for positive 
economic development.  Having a $15 billion deficit, it's not easy to 
attract businesses to this province because they know they will become 
responsible for that debt left by your Conservative administration. 
 
But even with that legacy of debt, when I go to Toronto I get a very, very 
positive reception about the new-found commitment to balancing the books in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  And they're pleasantly surprised that the 
government represented by the New Democratic Party would be the first 
government in Canada to seriously take on the issue of debt reduction and 
actually make a commitment to balance the books in the province in 1996. 
 
And so business people, while they will continue to urge us to make 
amendments to the various labour Bills, I think at another level are very 
satisfied with the work that is being done by this administration, and 
that's certainly reflected in the amount of exports that we have from the 
province which will be even enhanced further once we get the Trade 
Development Corporation up and running. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, they also congratulate the province to 
the west of us.  They like the approach that Mr. Klein is taking.  I hear 
business people all over this province, certainly, in the face of what they 
are looking forward to here, but certainly there's comments in the national 
newspapers about Mr. Klein's approach of no new taxes but balancing the 
province's books. 
 
And they applaud him also so you're not unique there, Mr. Minister, because 
governments across Canada recognize the fact that fiscal responsibility is 
part of the 1990s.  Balanced budgets are good for business.  No businessman 
will disagree with that, Mr. Minister -- no businessman disagrees. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, under this legislation, as I read it, it seems 
there's the opportunity for you to incorporate other companies under the 
provisions of the Act.  Are you envisioning anything else besides this 
particular trade entity to being incorporated under this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, not at this time.  What this 
legislation will do is establish the Trade Development Corporation.  And as 
I mentioned to the hon. member opposite, the Trade Development Corporation 
will be made up of private and public sector financing and will obviously 
be managed jointly.  And we think this is what true partnership is all 
about, and we are in constant consultation with the business community as 
this legislation has come forward. 
 



 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The question I asked, Mr. Minister, does this Act give you 
the power to incorporate other companies besides the one that you envision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The authority of this Act is to establish a trade 
development corporation.  And it's my understanding if they then wanted to 
do certain other things, this would be the board of directors, which would 
be private and public sector, they could provide services that they would 
see fit. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- So in other words, the board of the trading corporation 
could then incorporate other corporations without having to come back to 
this House.  Is that true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I want to be clear with the member because 
the authority under this Act is to set up one corporation.  And if there 
were any intent to set up any other corporations or parallel corporations, 
it would take an actual amendment to the Act. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  But I ask specifically if the board decides to 
incorporate a subsidiary company, can they do that without coming to the 
House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm advised that no, they would have to come 
back.  Like there would have to be another provision or amendment in order 
for another company to be set up.  This gives the authority only for the 
establishment of the Trade Development Corporation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- That's very important because will this corporation be 
subject to review by the Provincial 
 DAuditor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's my understanding that it would, given the 
fact that there will be a continuation of government funding for the 
corporation, and the fact that at least initially there will be continued 
to be -- and I would expect to be over the long haul -- involvement by the 
government, along with taxpayers' money, that it would fall under the 
purview of the auditor. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- So that this corporation and any subsidiaries which the 
board wishes to form will be reviewed by the Provincial Auditor and be part 
of his report on an annual basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There are no subsidiaries.  But the workings of 
the corporation would come under the purview and the review of the auditor. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Do you feel, Mr. Minister, that that will be sufficient as 
far as how public funds are expended here?  Are you anticipating the newly 
derived board doing anything like annual, semi-annual, quarterly reports -- 
that type of thing?  Is that envisioned that there will be steps beyond the 
Provincial Auditor to give the public accountability factors . . . give the 
public the assurance that this corporation is doing in fact what you said 



 

 

it will? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There will be, obviously, because this will come 
back to the House as part of the spending authority under the Department of 
Economic Development; there will be the opportunity for these kind of 
questions to be asked. 
 
The other thing that we will be doing is issuing an annual report and 
tabling it here in the Assembly, so that this can in fact go along with the 
estimates of the department.  And questioning on how the corporation is 
doing or how it's meeting the expectations of the partners, certainly will 
come under the purview of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, outside the House I've heard you talking 
about this initiative and you've invited private interests to invest in 
this particular thing.  Why were not the specific provisions and the 
guidelines for that investment not spelled out in the Bill?  The actual 
methodology that a private sector person like myself, for instance, who 
does export -- I export commodities into the western United States from my 
farm -- if I wish to invest in this, why wouldn't you put in the Bill the 
methodology that I would use to get involved in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just so you know, that it would not be normal 
process for fees and schedules to be in the actual legislation.  It would 
be an unusual situation.  Normally they're done by regulation, even in 
ordinary Acts.  This being even more removed, given the fact that it is an 
authority as opposed to a line department, the fee schedule, for example, 
if there were to be a fee for service for yourself if you were exporting 
grains or livestock and you used the service of the economic development 
authority, if they decided that they wanted some sort of fee for service as 
part of their structure, although they will be left to develop their own 
structure, that will be worked out within the framework of the Export 
Development Corporation. 
 
However these will be relatively public documents, and obviously when the 
first annual report is tabled, members of the Assembly will be able to 
question or comment on how that process works. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- I'm not necessarily referring to . . . I understand, Mr. 
Minister, how fees and services work vis-a-vis government departments and 
such. 
 
I'm talking about you invited people to invest, and I would suggest to you 
they probably would invest as an equity partner or they would invest as a 
shareholder or they would invest as a stakeholder -- in the entity, and 
that might entail a hundred dollars or it might entail $50,000.  But 
obviously you are asking for private sector stakeholders to invest on 
something larger than simply a fee-for-service basis, Mr. Minister.  
Otherwise your current department could provide that. 
 
What I thought would have been in the Bill is that you would have a 
schedule.  For instance, as a shareholder or as a person who's putting up 
risk capital or someone who is putting up fairly large pieces of money to 



 

 

be part and parcel of this, why wouldn't that methodology be in the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well simply put, that the export development 
authority will be producing a business plan and in there they will list out 
the way the mechanism for funding the operation will occur.  I've mentioned 
that there will be ongoing funding from the provincial government.  Rather 
than doing the export development within our department, our money will 
shift over to the export development authority. 
 
Then there'll be two other ways that money will flow into the Export 
Development Corporation.  There will be an annual membership fee, which 
will be based on the amount of exports that the given company who wants to 
join in the corporation will pay.  And then there will also be a mechanism 
of a fee for service for those companies who want to use the service of the 
Export Development Corporation. 
 
So you'll see the three streams of funding, at least initially, although as 
the business plan develops they may also want to amend or change in order 
to have other funding arrangements.  But this will all be listed out in the 
business plan of the economic development authority . . . or the export 
development authority. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, this is the first time I've heard about a business 
plan, Mr. Minister, from this board.  Is that business plan going to be 
aired in here, or is this something that will simply be internal?  
Obviously with public money being part of the business plan, is the 
Legislative Assembly going to have any opportunity to determine if those 
rules are applicable or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The way this will work is not unlike other 
authorities.  And if the member wants to look through the legislation on 
other authorities -- the Meewasin Authority, or the one that's closer to 
you, the Wakamow Valley Authority -- you will see in the department a grant 
that goes to that Authority.  And then in the House the way it works, you 
are able to ask if you like about the increased spending, decreased 
spending, what's going on within that Authority, and raise the profile, or 
raise issues that you might be concerned about. 
 
This will not be a great deal different than that.  There will be a line in 
the budget of Economic Development that will say so many thousands of 
dollars for the Trade Development Corporation.  And at that time, if you're 
not pleased with the amount of funding or if you're disappointed where the 
money is going to, you will be able to stand in the House and question the 
government on ways and means that the money is provided, and where the 
money is being spent. 
 
So there will be an absolute recording mechanism on where the money goes, 
and also accountability session, obviously that happens with other 
authorities.  This is not anything that is new or different for 
governments.  There are just numerous authorities that exist and this will 
not be greatly different than that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can appreciate your argument, Mr. Minister, except 



 

 

you're asking people here to do a wholly different thing.  I know the 
Wakamow Valley Authority and its mandate very well, and how they spend 
their money, which is in fixing up a river valley into a nice urban 
setting. 
 
But what you're talking about here is people going out into the big wide 
world with trade initiatives, some of which will work and some which won't.  
And there will be, for every good one, there might be a bad one sort of 
thing.  And business people understand that. 
 
That's why I was asking you about the methodology of how they're putting 
their money in.  I would suggest to you, some of them will be risking money 
because they see it as a potential benefit, so they'll put up some money 
and if it doesn't make the grade it doesn't make the grade.  They'll do 
better next time. 
 
Maybe you can answer it this way, Mr. Minister.  What level of private 
investment are you expecting, in what form, and in what time frame?  Maybe 
that would be a good way to get the discussion going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, what we're looking at here is as I have 
said, is up front and at the front end of the program a business plan, and 
at the back end or at the end of the year an annual report which seems to 
be the right process. 
 
The other thing that you have to appreciate is that this is a 
business-driven Trade Development Corporation.  The thrust for this Trade 
Development Corporation is not government wanting to simply go out and 
spend money on a Trade Development Corporation. 
 
This is very much people who export asking the government and working very 
closely with them on a plan in many, many planning sessions to develop this 
kind of a concept.  Really the legislation is just the tip of the iceberg.  
The work that has gone on in the private and public sector on development 
of this strategy has been going on for some 18 months now.  And this comes 
forward after very, very many meetings where there has now been arrived at 
a consensus in the business community, and government, that this is the 
proper way to go. 
 
And so what you see here is really a consensus of business and government 
on what the plan should look like.  That is, funding jointly from the 
private sector and government, a reporting mechanism to the legislature, a 
business plan that will be basically open to the public, funded in three 
main ways -- one stream coming from government, one from a fee for service 
where companies use the Export Development Corporation, and then an annual 
membership fee that will be allotted based on the amount of exports that 
the given company has. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Surely, Mr. Minister, you have some expectations of what 
that private sector investment will be, how it will probably start in the 
beginning, and how many of them will there be. 
 
I mean, as you put this thing together in consultation with private sector 



 

 

people, there must be a dollar number or an expectation that keeps coming 
around to people, and I think we'd like to understand what your 
expectations are, say in the first year after the passage of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, we're expecting in the first year of 
operation the numbers to be 1.4 million from government, which is sort of 
our traditional level that we're spending on trade development, and 
somewhere approaching 500,000 from the business sector; let's say about .4 
million from the business sector.  That gives you the ratio of how this 
will start out. 
 
I think there's an expectation among business people that starting there, 
government's level of involvement will probably stay relatively constant, 
maybe grow at the rate of inflation, but let's say stay fairly constant.  
And that being put in the place by the private sector as the corporation 
gets up and running and providing a service will likely increase. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Will the proposed move of the functions of the Department 
of Trade to the new corporation go ahead if you don't come up with enough 
private sector investors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What we're doing here is moving ahead with it 
with some basic understandings and commitments that there will be a fair 
bit of public money . . . or private money entering the system. 
 
I have to say to the member opposite, the 1.4 million that we're spending 
within government is being spent anyway and the simple fact is is that we 
believe that whether it's 300,000 or 500,000 coming in from the private 
sector, that this still will be a much better system of doing export 
development than what we have at the present time. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can appreciate that sentiment, Mr. Minister, and 
lots of things can happen out there.  If you don't get the required amount 
-- and obviously you've set a number in your head where this thing will 
work right as a beginning -- if that doesn't happen, are you still prepared 
to keep the same amount of public money in there and transfer the . . . As 
I understand it, the requirement of the board to take a number of the 
people from your department is there and they have to follow the same 
agreements.  They have to take these people at the salary that they're 
already at and all of the benefit packages and all those sorts of things 
have to flow across.  If you don't get the amount of private sector 
investment that you anticipate, will all of those things continue on 
anyway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  No, we're expecting to establish the Trade 
Development Corporation and we're certain that it's going to work.  And so 
once we start down this path we expect, with the commitment we have by the 
business community and their involvement in setting it up, that there will 
be a great uptake. 
 
And going on the basis of trade development corporations that we've studied 
and looked at around the country, but more importantly around the world, we 
find that if anything, most of the expectations are exceeded.  And 



 

 

Saskatchewan being such a major trading province, I just don't share the 
pessimism that the member opposite has about the responsibility of business 
people in coming forward and being involved in the Trade Corporation. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, it's not pessimism; it's just asking 
questions on behalf of Saskatchewan business people who are curious, to put 
it mildly, about what you're up to. 
 
Will this corporation be run on a non-profit basis or a for-profit basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It will be done on a non-profit basis.  But what 
amazes me a little bit, Mr. Chairman, is the sudden caution by the member 
opposite.  When he put $21 million into Imp-Pak Packaging in Swift Current 
through SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), there was no 
such caution.  When they were working on Mainprize Park down at the 
Rafferty dam, millions and millions of dollars building docks, building 
boat launches . . . 
 
The Chair: -- Order. Order. It being 5 o'clock the committee will rise and 
report progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act and to enact 
certain other provisions 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that the amendments be now read the first and 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move that 
this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Department of Economic Development Act, 

1993 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 
 


